Indeed, the image may appear idyllic at first — a love-drenched family scene with a pet — but its underlying dark motifs gradually take shape as we lower our gaze and look closer at the child. Da Vinci makes him reveal his purpose in subtle motions and gestures: he holds the lamb in a such a way as to create a juxtaposition between its head and his own. His inquisitive, ambiguous look narrates his actions: “look at us, mother, we’re exactly the same.”
In front of us is a dynamic composition that’s barely contained by the classic pyramid shape: every actor moves and interacts with the others, threatening to break the triangular boundaries — which may appear somewhat artificial as a result.
St. Anne is removed from Christ and his martyrdom both generationally and via visual hierarchy, a distance also emphasized by Mary’s sudden rush downwards, away from her mother, towards the child. Physically, the matriarch tops the group, and appears the largest of the participants. As our eyes travel down, the shapes become smaller — but their significance grows in inverse proportion, as they accumulate more symbolism.
The emotional force of the Virgin’s impulse towards her son anticipates another Christian canon, the Pieta. The child’s grip on the lamb symbolizes how tightly linked — apparently with all his limbs, as he would be with the cross — he is to the sacrifice the animal represents. He guides the lamb to look up at the mother, as if saying “I am — it, and it — is me,” forcing the parent to acknowledge the forthcoming passion.
By being placed between the Madonna and the lamb, small Jesus is made to mark “a stage” between his human start and divine purpose. Such compositional placement allows to infer the concept of the duality of Christ, as he absorbs from both ends, uniting them into one. He is made a mediator, reflecting his function of connecting between believing Christians and God.
To give his ideas a powerful visual anchor, Da Vinci creates a memorable repetition effect of outstretched hands. We see both Madonna and child extend their hands in an almost identical embracing motion; the repetition generates a visual rhythm, as our eyes go back and forth, following the saints as they return each other’s glances.
The misty, grand, mountainous landscape in the background encourages contemplation, much like it is reflected in St. Anne’s face. She, like us, is an almost external observer, removed somewhat from the mother and son physically, allowed to literally keep her head in the clouds.