M’s today’s blend is so homogeneous that sometimes it is difficult to discern any clear stylistic affiliation. The painter created a style that defies categorization — both a unique adaptation and a category of its own. Indeed, at some point it may seem that the artist may finally settle for any of the relevant trends — realism, hyper-realism or even impressionism, at the stage when light effects enjoy a particular emphasis. For an outside observer that expectation alone is highly stimulating. Ultimately, however, one learns that waiting for a definitive outcome is counterproductive — but more amazing is the fact that that only serves to increase the suspense. Is the artist playing some kind of a highly elaborate visual game? In my newly assumed role as a detective, I tend to say “yes” without a self-reproach of paranoia.
If pressed, I would have to say that the fine details, most reflections, depictions of glassy surfaces are usually hyper-real; light effects are often presented through a translucent impressionistic filter; the darker areas, fortified by earthly tones, exhibit strong realistic traits; finally, economical compositions may be found in either of the schools, as has been shown by several daily (and not only) painters. I admit that this analysis may only testify to my own confusion in the face of the entire (blogged) oeuvre. Once again, the only way I can explain this eclecticism is to suggest that it was the artist’s aim: to carefully study the possibilities of various trends, derive from each one a set of useful features and project them through an individual lens.
Perhaps this outline may serve as a tentative guide to examine and interpret specific paintings. There is no definite distribution of features; each piece may include either qualities in various ratios, depending on the theme and composition — but I find the endeavor itself titillating and gratifying. In M’s own words, the blog  was “created to chronicle the artist’s progress as a painter.” We witness this progress, but are doomed to remain a step behind — just where the artist wants us.