The Venus of Urbino derives its inspiration from 
The painting presents a full-fledged composition that balances somewhat the languorous static character of the reclining protagonist with a consistent dynamic component.
The tiles, foreshortned by the perspective, rhytmically lead to the end of the hall, where one of the maids is hurrying to prepare her mistress’ dress; the red dress of the other echoes the cushion’s red corner in the foreground. Thick verticals relieve the eye from the nearly all-black piece of wall behind’s the figure’s back.
This wall helps to define the boundary between the private and the public (or semi-private): the sleeping chamber at the foreground is “for your eyes only,” the hall appears to offer more access to the help, and possibly visitors. The portico entrance and the trees confirm the more open character of the main room.
It is the enclosed room that allows Venus to open her eyes and accompany her nudity with such a soul-baring gaze; Giorgione’s goddess, placed outside, sleeps with her eyes closed. Titian’s model is thus so much bolder, and so much more revelatory. Her unconditional honesty translates into a kind of incorrupt innocence, no matter how erotic and suggestive the context is.
These intimations lead to the notion that Titian gives physical attraction and pleasure an approbation, or at least a well considered aknowledgement. The image overall can be viewed as one giving legitimacy to the idea of sexuality, and endorsing intercourse (between a husband and a wife) as positive and desirable. Catholic dogma of marital intimacy and procreative sex as inferior to celibacy, and as of being merely the lesser of two evils between itself and extramarital relations, dissolves in this image.
At the same time, the author insists on the marital interpretation, basing his claims on iconography: the two cassoni, probably containing the girl’s bridal garments, and the curled little dog, a very common symbol of marital fidelity (
Private, discreet ownership could be the most fitting bridge to the gap (one not altogether uncommon in contemporary Western society) between sexy and marital. Intended to be owned and seen in a private collection, the image becomes a personal message – similar to that sleeping chamber – “for your eyes only.”
And today still, while the curves of Venus’ naked body are there for the eyes of all to observe and admire, 