 
 
 
The artist’s creative approach to the empty areas on the surface he works with paradoxically enhances the perception of volume and space in the beholder’s mind’s eye. He concocts an engaging interplay between active and passive zones — and I particularly like the idea of selective passivity, where the nearly blank, discolored parts play a crucial role in enlivening the darker and apparently more substantial regions. This combination reminds me somehow of the negatives we see in photography, and, after a more careful examination, there is indeed something of the photographic negative in these landscapes. As a result, his artwork may be viewed with a double standard — but in the best possible meaning of the phrase.
 
Consequently, the spring lightweight florals, the denser groves and the concrete structures, they all exhibit a reassuring sense of style and its technical opposite. Moreover, the artist even-handedly combines these themes, placing dainty buds near formidable buildings or deep inside wide landscapes. Slopes and curves, either imaginary or real, further emphasize the sense of space, particularly pastoral — even the cityscapes appear to be stifled by the approaching growth; perhaps this is why the buildings look so abandoned. On the other hand, the inhabitants might just have gone outside to enjoy the flora, and understandably so.
 
To reiterate, the artist demonstrates adroit utilization and deep understanding of space, to the point of ability to manipulate it: to play and toy with it. He offers breathtaking vistas with an easy hand, and with an almost ironic, and somehow wise touch. He doesn’t tackle the theme, but rather approaches it carefully and assuredly, as if space itself were a frightened and alert wild antelope; he nets it with his brush and the concept behind it. The painter’s style impresses with both lightness and compositional range and solidity: he is a universal artist not only because of the multiple media he works with, but due to what he achieves with it as well.
 
 