Although it may seem that simply reversing the first technique would do the trick, such an approach would give only partial results. Some basic principles indeed need to be turned on their heels but, undoing, or “undressing” a painting also involves procedures that were irrelevant to the completing process. In other words, this method is not an opposite equivalent, but a new and entirely different manner of using your imagination for interpreting art.
 We have talked about the use of digital assistance before, but in this case technology plays a particularly important role. Indeed, what other better way is there to manipulate a reproduction of a painting than by using a computer and an image processing software? A computer program allows to discolor hues, rotate the image, remove parts of it, zoom in and out of the picture. Moreover, you may draw lines and make notes an the image without worrying about corruption (provided you made a backup copy), a helpful feature to denote carious underlying connections.
Sometimes the only way to get at the core idea of a piece is by getting rid of the secondary details. For this purpose, a computer program may prove to be an indispensable tool. If you are weary of using external technological aides for an assignment because it is supposed to be entirely yours, don’t be. Using modern technology is a known technique to extract information from art, it is being commonly used by art historian and critics. Professionals use X-rays and infra-red rays, we will settle for a strong PC.
Usually you see it right away. It is that place on a painting that had your eyes fixed on it for longer than usual. Admittedly, for every interpreter that place would be different — but that’s the whole point of interpretation. You have to go with your gut and trust your intuition: use the software to get rid of the rest of the image, magnify that part and study it carefully.
We have seen that undoing the painting means making countless mini-paintings from each isolated area, either the included or excluded one. These areas suddenly receive unprecedented attention; by focusing on them you discover secret links within the work and generate your own ideas about them. But even more importantly is the discovery of symbols. Because during the process of “undressing,” your attitude to a painted locus changes, you start to attribute symbolical significance to even the smallest and seemingly unimportant details. Indeed, many of these attributions would eventually turn out to be irrelevant but, some will give you penetrating insight about the painting as a whole.