The theme of a solitary working peasant reoccurs also in the Knitter (see image below), as well as in 
The girl appears to be clutching a rosary and praying — taking a break from shepherding to serve a different master. The sheep behind her may imply being a part of a religious flock, as obedient and subservient as the grazing animals. The flock counterbalances the girl, the entire  group producing the shape of a cross turned ninety degrees clockwise — reinforcing a religious metaphoric reading. Millet offers a smooth, obvious transition from the literal to the figurative.
Downcast gaze, a trademark motif in Millet’s models, suggests a depressed state of mind, a weak, downtrodden existence. Downcast eyes can be a powerful and expressive psychological instrument: Johannes Vermeer, the Dutch baroque painter, deployed it quite often, depicting his actors, servants as well as masters, lowering their gaze and directing their attention to the task at hand. 
Even if we assume that Millet’s subjects could read and write, their placement against a bleak landscape backdrop (as opposed to Vermeer’s interiors) removes the possibility of leisure that these activities require. Millet’s peasants lack the calm and confidence of Vermeer’s models; they appear unable to transcend themselves through self-education. Instead, their transcendence becomes a cause to be taken up by the artist himself.
The worried faces of these young women convey suffering and sadness, some sort of malaise or dissatisfaction, however suppressed or contained. They seem to find neither joy, nor peace in their work, which consumes them completely. It’s a state of  thorough hopelessness. In turn, the endlessness of the sky and the land emphasize the girl’s vulnerability, pushing her towards the viewers, almost forcing an intimate encounter. The overall image is programmed to evoke pity and sympathy.
The boundaries of the canvas, cutting abruptly both the plain and the sky, appear to be the only restraints of nature’s sheer expanses. Hence, the artist becomes the girl’s protector, generously fitting the frame — as if after searching for a perfect angle with a camera — to capture her safely and neatly with the flock, and tone down the effect of being rendered frighteningly insignificant by the elements. Here Millet’s sentimentality becomes the very method  by which he transcends his shepherdess, at least in art, to greener pastures.