 he is unsparing in his choice of models and representation (physical defects in the form of folds of fat), but often incorporates dancelike motifs into the poses: the first step towards grace that redeems the defects, the second being the wings. though at the first glance they may seem like an alien addition, even a farcical ridicule (in comparison with the traditional cherubs gleeful, giddy children), i strongly tend towards the more compassionate and humanistic interpretation that the artist wanted to reveal the saintly side of the subjects. perhaps they are seeking some sort of deliverance, or have already found it, either way, here the notion of sainthood and humanity becomes inseparable, and slightly awe-inspiring.
 but that is not to say that there is no humor, or self-referential irony in these sketches. i think that there is something very releasing in the freedom and ease with which the artist depicts physical imperfections and that this is exactly what the models are feeling. they generally exhibit resignation and acceptance suffering maybe but not rebellion or resistance. they appear aware but irreverent of their flaws, which hence cease being flaws: probably the best known way to accumulate charisma and deliver its joyous effects to the beholder. the other funny streak is the formal technical resemblance to caricature. in some pieces, the genres intersect quite often, and eventually even the practice of discerning which is which becomes ironic.
 finally, i would like to dwell on the theatrical element that transpires from the series, in various degrees. the subjects are usually positioned against an abstract background, sometimes a wall, or placed upon a pedestal. had we combined this feature with the graceful movements, particularly of the legs, with the wings as props and with the expressive, dramatic gestures, a general suspicion would arise that we have been transported behind the scenes of a strange theater. thus, the backstage would become the unifying concept behind the series. in turn, the sketch-book might reemerge as a monograph describing the venue and the actors while this review could be seen as the accompanying text.
the watercolors may at times seem unpredictable, and bubbly, in the most literal meaning of the word. the two purple paintings include bubbles in various forms, some reminding of defects appearing on old black and white films and daguerreotypes here we are, back to photography again. anyhow, either small or big, they conjure the ghosts of pointillism, but with an original twist. the final result amounts to several layers of color being superimposed, once again contributing to depth and varied rendering of space. in simple words, i think that what makes these paintings so interesting is that yes, we can look at the trees, but we can also look between them.
though the artist's original intention was to depict the hills in various seasons during the course of one year, he appears to have leaped back to much more distant eras. some of the trees bear a resemblance to mesozoic tree-ferns. if it weren't for the path dissecting the ground in one of the pieces, the illusion of ancient wilderness would have been perfect. but perhaps the artist was aware of that quality: the exotic viewing angles, and compositions involving close ups and panoramic views shake the onlooker up, in a very primitive (basic) and violent way, prompting associations with the dawn of civilization and the beginning of life on our planet. and thus, the series as a whole work as a kind of a force of nature and, most of all, of human nature.
the artist's creative approach to the empty areas on the surface he works with paradoxically enhances the perception of volume and space in the beholder's mind's eye. he concocts an engaging interplay between active and passive zones and i particularly like the idea of selective passivity, where the nearly blank, discolored parts play a crucial role in enlivening the darker and apparently more substantial regions. this combination reminds me somehow of the negatives we see in photography, and, after a more careful examination, there is indeed something of the photographic negative in these landscapes. as a result, his artwork may be viewed with a double standard but in the best possible meaning of the phrase.
consequently, the spring lightweight florals, the denser groves and the concrete structures, they all exhibit a reassuring sense of style and its technical opposite. moreover, the artist even-handedly combines these themes, placing dainty buds near formidable buildings or deep inside wide landscapes. slopes and curves, either imaginary or real, further emphasize the sense of space, particularly pastoral even the cityscapes appear to be stifled by the approaching growth, perhaps this is why the buildings look so abandoned. on the other hand, the inhabitants might just have gone outside to enjoy the flora, and understandably so.
to reiterate, the artist demonstrates adroit utilization and deep understanding of space, to the point of ability to manipulate it: to play and toy with it. he offers breathtaking vistas with an easy hand, and with an almost ironic, and somehow wise touch. he doesn't tackle the theme, but rather approaches it carefully and assuredly, as if space itself were a frightened and alert wild antelope, he nets it with his brush and the concept behind it. the painter's style impresses with both lightness and compositional range and solidity: he is a universal artist not only because of the multiple media he works with, but due to what he achieves with it as well.
light splashes the flowers, filling every millimeter, where it lands, to the brim. it seems as though they receive a second life, and, in a way, compromise the constraints of their 
thus the flowers soften the initial shock they could be compared to the aftereffect of colorful patterns we see when closing our eyes after being blinded with a sudden beam. with eyes reopened we are confronted with a bright blossom the artist is careful to define a robust focal point which draws the viewer back into the painting. it is then when the compositions gradually reveal themselves: a corner of a white fence, a patch of grass, a brilliant glass surface, a window frame and, of course, the vases. some of these objects and surfaces contain and conceal more objects and more surfaces. a bee on a flower. another window behind the window... looking at alvin's paintings is a process, and it is marked with discoveries.-
eventually, the generosity of light, find detail and the compositional diversity mould that optimistic and uplifting spirit that, if i may say so, becomes the moral backbone of the artist's style. some of his other paintings include people, particularly children, youth and the willful urge for discovery find their way into still life as well. within that context, the division of space into layers and separate areas of color may serve as an allegory for future and the steps taken towards it. we all live through dark streaks, but it is the bright ones that make the whole experience worthwhile, the artist reminds us.
the artist studies their responses with an approach that mixes anthropological interest with empathy. he strives to find the right proportion, as being too scientific and detached may translate into cold interpretations whereas too endearing rendering may be just as repellent for its sentimentality. to my mind, he finds his golden ratio in the context of these paintings as a series. levels of sophistication from a simple swing, towards a mechanical apparatus and concluding with a car explain the increasing disaffection imprinted on the protagonist's faces. the pleasure of spontaneity gives way to discontent with artificial jerky progression, movement evolves, and so does the psychological reaction.
the teenage girl, trapped in the car and bridled by the belt sits with a sour face, looking out of the window as if with a quiet rebuke. the boy rests upon his bike in an uncomfortable posture while the swinging girl enjoys herself to the full. the artist follows his subjects and creates a series that convey the short history of human civilization. i find the idea not only entertaining, but also inspirational. have you unlearned to enjoy life? look at the laughing girl and her effortless balance, and learn again. do you cherish some ideals no longer relevant, like 
eventually the artist reinforces the boundary between the natural experience of aesthetic appreciation and its artificial commercial exploitation, no matter how sophisticated. where business blurs, art distinguishes. on a different note, i find that these pieces hold the potential to explode, just like a coca-cola bottle opened after a few shakes. during the two stages the artist shakes ideas, only to show how incompatible (like the red sign near the piece of sky) they can be. in a somewhat ironical finish, he directs the paintings at the viewer, contradictory to the instructions for use usually printed on the bottles' label. art, unlike carbonated beverages, explodes only metaphorically.
on the other hand, this is not a call for revolution, but a careful, even stoic study of the current state of events. by his creative effort the artist repackages commercial ideas and presents them to the public again, but on his own terms. he doesn't offer false hope, reveling in the idea of regaining lost innocence and there is nothing sarcastic about these paintings. rather, he buoys the issue with a reserved attitude and gently reminds us that just as the pleasure derived from watching still life can transcend the subject, the pleasure of life can overcome any commercial purpose that tries to abduct it.
 we witness a sensitivity on the artist's part: she steps back to allow the written narrative to have its word. the paintings are a part of a bigger design, each is the first frame of a long series of frames which, perhaps, should be more aptly called pages, or chapters. the painter participates in a teamwork with the writer (and the publisher), bearing responsibility for the first impression and visual imprint. this is a risky enterprise, because some people will decide whether to read the book or not on the basis of the cover, despite the common saying. considering the classic texts, it is also an overwhelming one but not enough to confuse the artist, who produced vivid and effective visual introductions that match up to the written content.
the recurring visual motif of a slanting line may be seen as the coded sign that marks and instigates a descent into the abyss of memory. it appears in various forms and variations, but usually involves a tree, either a living, a dead or a processed one. it may be a slightly bent tree in the foreground, later to be substituted by a heavily bent one in a forest in the backdrop, a sloping roof, made of wooden boards, while the whole structure seems to lean back, or a sharp slope that forces a tree into an uncomfortable angle. the slants guide and push the audience downstairs , towards its subconscious or forgotten experiences, the general calm atmosphere ensures that the descent occurs without any hindrances and would generally evoke pleasant memories.
you might want to compare the houses to 
there is another curious feature that may be interpreted as a sign of ecological awareness. the hair that flows backwards supposedly informs the direction of the wind. the depicted setting, however, may seem too quiet for a real wind to exist in it, the existense of the flow thus would imply on the inner state of the model. in other words, the apparent indication of wind may serve as a visual metaphor for a spiritual disposition, uneasy and tumultuous. moreover, the backward, counter intuitive direction of hair flow would signify the artist's desire to portray a protest. it is possible to recognize the context of the protest (again considering the calm, eerie surroundings) as of a placid and indifferent society on the one hand and of extinction and withering that seems to take place all around on the other.
the contrast of the colors between the in- and outdoors 
i would also like to encourage you to develop your own techniques. nothing here is written in stone. i will try to reveal how i arrive at these methods, and hopefully outline the blueprint for the whole process to offer the fishing rod along with some fish. however, when dealing with imagination, there are always the unknowables of inspiration, epiphanies, meditation induced revelations and such and sundry of mental and spiritual paths. once again, i would suggest not to lock on a single known method and always leave room for... your imagination to work the wonders.
one of the crucial for all of us notions to internalize declares that when we interpret a work of art it doesn't matter, at this stage, what we think the artist meant to express or convey. there is a widespread and generally accepted principle that once a work of art leaves the studio, once it is out there, it is yours to interpret any way you like. this is a heavy burden to take off of your mind, your imagination would soar like an air balloon after jettisoning some ballast.
everything goes. too many good ideas get stifled on the altar of high and low brow differentiations. there is no high and there is no low there are only good arguments, based on good logic and supported by actual examples. every work of art can be spun to suit your ideas, as long as you arrive at the conclusion via a series of sensible claims.
some theories suppose that the artist's personal biography is tightly linked with his artwork, psychoanalysis would be one such theory. however, there are also opposite views, which position works of art independently of the creator's persona, making emphasis on the piece itself rather than on surrounding trivia. in my opinion, you do not have to adhere to neither of the trends: just be aware that they exist, and use either, when needed, for your purposes. perhaps this is an intellectual opportunism, but then, art interpretation is an inherently opportunistic activity.
even if the artist offers a ready made interpretation, his or her ideas cannot determine what the art piece means for you. the author does not own other people's thoughts on his own creation and everyone has the right to interpret it. this leads, once again to incredible freedom.
in many ways, imagination is all about the possibilities. the painting you see in front you was the arriving point for the artist, but it is one of departure for you. paradoxically, our ignorance of the private process of painting puts us into an advantageous position. even if you arrive at the same conclusions about the piece, you may choose a different route and it is the route that matters, as it describes your own analytical interpretative process something both an artist and an instructor would want and demand to see.
therefore, what could have been and, subsequently, what should have been will be the focus of the next parts of this chapter. we will learn techniques to engage in a battle of minds and creative thought with the artist and her work, with the clear objective to win to formulate concepts and theories and impose them on the work of art as if they were intended by the artist herself. we will learn to decipher and interpret art with the same tool the artist used to make it imagination.
although it may seem that simply reversing the first technique would do the trick, such an approach would give only partial results. some basic principles indeed need to be turned on their heels but, undoing, or undressing a painting also involves procedures that were irrelevant to the completing process. in other words, this method is not an opposite equivalent, but a new and entirely different manner of using your imagination for interpreting art.
-we have talked about the use of digital assistance before, but in this case technology plays a particularly important role. indeed, what other better way is there to manipulate a reproduction of a painting than by using a computer and an image processing software? a computer program allows to discolor hues, rotate the image, remove parts of it, zoom in and out of the picture. moreover, you may draw lines and make notes an the image without worrying about corruption (provided you made a backup copy), a helpful feature to denote carious underlying connections.
sometimes the only way to get at the core idea of a piece is by getting rid of the secondary details. for this purpose, a computer program may prove to be an indispensable tool. if you are weary of using external technological aides for an assignment because it is supposed to be entirely yours, don't be. using modern technology is a known technique to extract information from art, it is being commonly used by art historian and critics. professionals use x-rays and infra-red rays, we will settle for a strong pc.
usually you see it right away. it is that place on a painting that had your eyes fixed on it for longer than usual. admittedly, for every interpreter that place would be different but that's the whole point of interpretation. you have to go with your gut and trust your intuition: use the software to get rid of the rest of the image, magnify that part and study it carefully.
we have seen that undoing the painting means making countless mini-paintings from each isolated area, either the included or excluded one. these areas suddenly receive unprecedented attention, by focusing on them you discover secret links within the work and generate your own ideas about them. but even more importantly is the discovery of symbols. because during the process of undressing, your attitude to a painted locus changes, you start to attribute symbolical significance to even the smallest and seemingly unimportant details. indeed, many of these attributions would eventually turn out to be irrelevant but, some will give you penetrating insight about the painting as a whole.
brainstorming means artificially triggering a very real storm of ideas inside your brain. we start because we want to, but we continue because we can't stop the process resembles a chain reaction, which once has been set into motion, would cease only after exhausting all available matter, in our case the subject matter of the painting at hand.
like an atomic explosion, brainstorming may produce megatons of notes and ideas in a very short period of time. all you need is a pen and a piece of paper (or a keyboard and a computer screen) to generate raw material, all or some of which may turn out to be useful in the following careful analysis.
brainstorming is always about something. in our case, it is about a work of art. in a way, having a definite and known object to write about is a privilege, add to that the subject of the paper that you need to submit, and you have several natural boundaries that will help to keep you focused.
what we are trying to achieve here is to find some sort of a solid framework to tame the chaotic flow of thoughts which becomes unleashed when we start brainstorming. think of it that way: the inside working of your mind are unknown even to us, but we can prepare for them, and be ready for them when the material starts to flow outside, on to the surface.
this may seem a little paradoxical, but in it fact makes all the sense in the world. if you are dealing with something unexpected and unpredictable, you always prepare the best way you can. if what the movies say is true, that's what the government does in their programs for alien invasion. but this is worst case scenarios in our case, the worst case is, in fact, the best. we like alien, we want alien.
too many stories are being told about wasted opportunities. for instance how many oil wells have been closed down for inefficiency only because the owner could not collect everything that poured out of them. in other words, you want to be ready. there is no guarantee that you won't surprise yourself (in a good way), but at least you will have some tools to record everything.
it is very important that you decide whether you prefer to look at the image continuously throughout the session or would rather have a long look and then remove the image and work with the painting locked in your mind.
the advantages of the first method are quite obvious. the image is right there in front of you. when stuck, you will be able to shift from one area to another, you will have the ability to rotate it, cover some parts of it, isolate others. seeing the piece gives you flexibility and allows for a whole range of supporting actions.
the principal disadvantage is that you may become distracted by the painting. this is another paradox: the same object that actually is the center of your attention may interfere with the process of brainstorming about it. what might happen is that you would regress to a regular viewing. brainstorming is supposed to be a very intense, short-lived activity. once again, ideas need to flow from the inside, having the painting in front of you may tempt you to respond to it superficially and simply write down what you see this is both time consuming and it deals too much with the outside material. and this undermines the whole exercise.
the advantages of the second method are less evident, yet may be just as powerful. many people, when imprinting an image in their memory, do it automatically by singling out features that seem most important to them. it so happens that these features are also the ones you will be writing about, they are the first words that will cover the pristine surface of your paper or screen. so in a way, you would have the benefit of knowing exactly where to begin.
the main disadvantage is that the image gradually becomes distorted in our mind, and the stamp it leaves there might be-slowly washed away, like a footprint on a sandy beach. that is another reason for the time limit: to optimally use short-term memory while the imprint is still fresh.
so why is it so important? because it is the first session that is the most fruitful and the most effective the first experience is usually the-most memorable and fresh -this is how our minds work. fortunately, there is a way out of this conundrum: all you need to do is practice a couple of times. brainstorm about several paintings using both methods, compare the yields and derive the necessary conclusions. some, who possess photographic memory will have easier time making a choice.
the punch of the piece ensues from the contrast of the black wearing cool dandy having a smoke and a martini with the imposing red rectangle facing the man. it's unclear what it means, whether it is a mirror reflecting the murky interior (although a mirror would have probably shown the sitter's face) or an abstract painting. the artist sneaks in an irony by the color juxtaposition : is the man really that cool and confident? is he impervious to desire and impulse that the color red is known to signify? could he in fact be an emotional wreck, posing and trying to conceal his inner state by fashionable clothing? all these questions are left hanging in the air, intensifying the general mood of smoky mystery.
the most obvious divergence from the 
the glasses and the bottles assume symbolical meaning, both echoing and implying the woman's fragility. there are countless imaginable scenarios: she may be nervously waiting for someone who will never arrive a situation that could break her heart and each glass and bottle may seem to clink and tremble along with her inner self. the sheer number of glass objects further accentuate her fragility (both physical and emotional). her body's shape resembles a slender champagne glass, or a bottle, overall, the glass intensifies the mood and enriches it with an understated dimension of precipice, danger and risk.
finally, one has to wonder where is the barman, in both paintings. after all a bar is a place where people congregate for the sake of spending time together and enjoying each other's company. even if someone prefers to remain in total solitude (in a venue meant to be crowded), there is always the barman somewhere around, the ubiquitous steward who traditionally absorbs some of the drinkers' gloom. we witness here an artificial situation where no one except the principle person is visible: this prompts to guess that something has happened, something serious and unexpected, or at least about to happen. once again, in these two bestselling paintings brent lynch probed into the 
triangles, rectangles and squares, all parts of the barns, coalesce into three dimensional boxes which may appear unstable and unsteady in their environment. indeed, the plains around them tune in with my childhood vision of 
finally, these barns are tall, formidable buildings with a peculiar roof. the lower part consists of a simple box-like foundation, but the loft is unusually stylized this composite must present an irresistible appeal for the visual artist. the practical purpose cannot conceal the exotic and somewhat grotesque form. such a beast rising in a middle of a vast plain would inevitably become a ravishing eye candy. casey klahn's artwork gives us a true sweet tooth's taste test.
to make a certain point, i would like to return for just a moment to the magnificent four. there are many things i could say (and probably will some time in the near future) about each of these modern classic painters, but there is one thing common to all in the way they influence me: their artwork can fill me with jubilant, incomprehensible laughter. i nevertheless try to trace the origin of this response i guess that some colors are inherently funny pink for example and they knew how to isolate that quality and bring it out as to force the audience to respond. but what i noticed about casey klahn's artwork is that it appears as though his colors and compositions aim to make the observer cry. in a way, that makes him both a follower and a rebel.
several features conspire to produce said effect. first there is the unstable quivering quality of pastel, some of the pieces appear as if seen from behind a car's front window when it's raining. objects (trees) look heavily smudged, lines break down and some areas of color appear to be still in the process of modulation. second is the use of pure blue reminiscent of the sea, the patches of blue indeed bring to mind large bodies of water. and third is the thick, streaming down lines of the trees, resembling water pipes. all of these characteristics deal with water and raindrops in one way or another. although, the endeavor to find a logical or somehow sensible explanation to the mentioned teary reaction may still appear a futile exercise.
in order to alleviate some of the intensity, the artist creates a break a vista in the fence-like arrangement of the trees, sometimes changing the color within that passage, as if carving out a cave a safe haven. the break also constitutes an additional geometrical figure: another rectangle or triangle. in a way, it plays the role of both a tentative focal point and a compositional epilogue, a beginning and an end at the same time, at different stages of viewing. casey klahn mentions in his artist statement that his desire is to allow the feelings the viewer has for these color compositions to be foremost, and readily available. i think he achieved both.
 i once watched a television show about 
 he went on saying that the pattern on the cliff is not incidental and that the stones were intentionally shaped to repeat those distant outlines. as your host for today's art and critique show, i would like to draw your attention to the trees performing exactly the same trick. all there is to adjust is the medium of expression and the objects used for it. from three dimensional realm the artist turns to two dimensional rendering, and, perhaps accordingly, instead of solid immovable objects such as stones and mountains he depicts transient and unstable trees and clouds.
 i think that the compositional correlation underlies the whole series and gives it that meta-narrative quality though purely visual and, considering the infinite number of available viewings and readings, also abstract. so in a way, what happens here is the abstracting of the abstract (the rough shapes of the trees and clouds) a twist with a strong postmodernist overtone of a somewhat decadent flavor. and now we enter the (even more) speculative and theoretical part of our show this is exactly the kind of decadence that supposedly led to the demise of the great inca civilization. while each painting emulates the remote art of 
arguably the most elaborate painterly element in cindy revell's oeuvre is space. subjects in her still life works spread on well-defined platforms, sculpted with light effects that may seem surprisingly intricate for small or even medium-sized-paintings. but looking at her illustrations or covers for children's books reveals a reversal to flat two dimensionality, or images where the illusion of space is only rudimentary a result of certain simplifications, appropriate for children's minds. it indeed may seem that the realistic oil pieces have been painted by another artist, so different they appear from the illustrations. the painter's ability to fully immerse-herself in a specific genre is almost-uncanny.
space takes on an additional spin in furniture art such as these trunk decorations and paintings. these boxes separate space, the artwork literally defining and encasing it in a three dimensional ambiance. i think that this twist is symbolical of the artist's ability to shape space (in realist works as well) and of her continuous dialog with it, or conversation, if you will. it may appear as if the painter is consulting with space while working much like people consult each other while discussing the color with which to paint a room during repairs and lets its voice be heard and reverberated.
the images endear themselves to the viewer: playful and colorful, they also evoke a whole series of associations with similar art forms. the artist mentions wall art, there are also the bas-relief sculptures, amphora drawings and so on. each plate contains a cultural microcosm an indian jungle reminiscent of kipling's tales, or a snapshot of italian cuisine, its recipes and the art of food preparation. quick, sharp movements and a rainbow of colors attract the eye at first, highly dynamic compositions and multitude of detail entertain it after the first impression subsides. but possibly the most rewarding aspect of this kind of art is the ability to touch it and literally sense it with our fingers. it panders to this childish instinct to sense and feel various objects and eventually indulges it too.
 which, considering the style, may not be that simple. the contemplative expressions have to counterbalance playful and imaginative stylistic features, such as lack of a backdrop, schematic and highly simplified drawing of most animals (just compare the cats in the illustrations with the cats in realist oil paintings the discrepancy is no less than startling). the list continues: grotesque body parts, distorted perspectives and irrational angles assigned to almost everything big enough to get noticed at the first glance. i think that for that counter effect the artist borrows facial expressions from the spanish tradition from the majas who never smile. 
this may sound far fetched, but there are many curious similarities. the girls are brunettes, just as 
cindy revell's models do not smile, and bear the mark of self-abandonment, the result of their activities of sleep or meditation. most of the mentioned ladies also appear engrossed in thought, apparently about themes the attributes of which appear beside them: a lute to symbolize music, a palette and a portrait to allude to painting. there is a common air of independence and self-sufficiency.
i think that these two qualities underlie that product (healthy soft drinks) or that concept mentioned earlier. both herbal tea and meditation help to take care of one's body, having the choice to use them denotes control, which in turn denotes emancipation and freedom... i should stop though, before this review sounds too much like a copy.
the artist consistently (even religiously) remains within the genre: most changes are limited to composition and because of that are easier to follow. stable framework allows for the radical shifts within it, stability and change interlock and form a style rich with controlled modification a mature and confident expressive instrument. but imagine a different scenario: suppose the artist wanted to experiment with some generic qualities geometrical form and lighting, for instance. the fruits slowly lose their recognizable shape, approaching a more cubist representation, light loses meaning, the compositions become flat... i don't think that would work (probably a complete stylistic make over is needed). in a way, this counter example emphasizes how solid and reliable that framework is.
light may fall from either direction, and elucidate areas usually ignored by the human eye. this feature is quite elusive (ok, i'm speaking for myself), but when discovered gives a sense of relief i have to wonder if eliciting such a response was a part of the plan. it appears that the artist enjoys shaping her subjects by adding white and by manipulating value. both color and light display properties reminiscent of flemish still life painting, a tradition the artist mentions as one of her influences. the air indeed appears to mix the soft and broad northern sunlight with cool, light breeze, added to this is that quaint sanctity of interior or to resurrect that mix.
 i think that the artist has developed a focused vision: she strives to minimize frictions (and loss of mental energy resulting from it) occurring between the audience and the art piece, created by the painter's persona. in other words, she aims to downplay her interference as the creator, in a way trying to showcase the art as independent, objective thing that appears from nowhere and should be judged simply for what it is. i find this idealistic approach (or my own understanding of it as such) appealing. i would claim that the artist positions herself as a skilled and sensitive visual communicator. she redefines the process of presenting and viewing art discreetly and without unnecessary grandeur.
color virtually vibrates, implying temporal progression, pieces depicting sunrise and sunset, when shifts in time become particularly highlighted,- further underscore the sense of passing time. composition is minimal: monet would paint only one or two haystacks, and avoid monotony by stressing perspective. the stack in front either dwarfs its kin, or breaks its form by partially covering it. while the inherently stationary nature of these scenes seems to contrast with the rhythm of 
interplay of light and shadow often splits individual haystacks into simpler (easily visually manageable) geometrical forms, when light is scarce, the snow performs the same task, covering only the side facing the wind, effectively delineating triangles and trapezoids. the long rectangles of the shadows also contribute to this geometric dance.
could the close attention the artist paid to the relationship between colored geometrical forms focusing on their juxtapositions in nature have carried the seeds of abstraction? several decades later, such painters as kandinsky and malevich removed all links to figurative subject-matter, identifying differently colored planes (triangles, trapezoids, complex irregular shapes) as a painterly theme in its own right. perhaps, in a way, monet anticipates the thematics of abstract painting in his haystacks.
while the artist reveals a good eye for finding original compositions, overall the works appear relatively orthodox, in line with classic landscape painting norms. sometimes it seems that the brush revels in the simplest, yet joy bringing pleasures of establishing a colorful contrast between the scarlet flowers and their surroundings.
perhaps these works proved the flowers an unfitting subject-matter for later series: while bright and colorful, the do not have volume unlike the haystacks and the poplars or an accompanying mirror effect unlike the water lilies and the pond. lack of these qualities reduces the options of light and shade interplay, a quintessential impressionist element.
in a way, these are some of monet most earthy works: the flowers, literally growing from the ground, appear unrelated to the atmosphere, belonging strictly to the domain of the land. they resemble a weighty blanket infused with a bright hue, which almost literally presses them down.
light, though made somewhat apparent, does not yet exude a vibrancy that permeates the entire ambiance of later output, where the boundaries between the tangible and intangible appear to evaporate in the form of pulsating color. there the subjects, bulky or tall, function as links between the elements of air and earth, carrying all the permutations of a rising or setting sun's rays.
and so it was the poplars, appearing in the background of separate poppy works, and the haystacks, implied by the farms caught on other canvases, that eventually captured the artist's imagination.
impressionism is known for its core objective of making the air present and visible by capturing light. and indeed, atmosphere is given an active role in the series: it can be hazy, foggy, cold or warm, subsequently, the cathedral can come across as mystical, enigmatic, deterring or welcoming. every color can find a matching response in the viewers' emotional palette, as the stone convincingly wakes to life.
being impressionism's most consistent adherent, monet also proved its most meticulous: he was known to get up early in the morning in order to witness how the sun changes the appearance of the subject by spraying it with rays, and creating countless shadow effects. here those become almost literal, as the facade in the golden noon version nearly melts in the heat, while cool, winter harmonies make the architecture resemble icicles, and consequently seem fragile. the role of color becomes more and more dominant and in a way, monet finds a pure, unadulterated channel of communication through hue.
these paintings are not easy to approach, as the cathedral is cramped into incomparably smaller dimensions, resulting in a barely bearable intensity that impends over the viewer. the sheer mass of- material jolts and arrests at once. moreover, there is an underlying warning that challenges the observer, as if the paintings wish to dominate and impose, just as the building itself does to visitors. it's impossible to encompass the entire structure with a single gaze, yet by using oil paints and a piece of canvas, monet makes us do exactly that.
it's fascinating how religious symbols retain their influence even after being transferred from one art form to another. indeed, perhaps they accumulate more power after such transposition, becoming active missionary vehicles of faith, vehicles that can be moved from one museum to another, and seen by as many people as possible.
in a series of works depicting his garden at giverny, monet exploits these water qualities to a full extent. the artist paints a pond that is covered in floating lilies, overlooked by a japanese bridge, and surrounded by lush vegetation, all reflected. it is a setting that could be mistaken for a primordial jungle had the arching wooden structure not revealed signs of cultivation.
mirrored trees and surface-bound lilies create a complex visual grid: interspersed one with the other, they produce an inverted sky effect, where islands of blooms act as clouds. in comparison, the actual sky in the poplar series presents a much more restrained, sobering opposite air has more space to move around, change, and breathe, here water absorbs everything insatiably, displaying a saturated, static view. indeed, if it were not for the underlying sense of elegance and refinement that's more akin to gallic (japanese inspired) rather than african vision of nature, these scenes would appear menacing.
an important motif that lends the paintings some dynamic becomes the vista. it opens up before the viewers, coils idly, and lures again and again into monet's magical world.
arguably the most dominant stylistic feature in these paintings is the dense, overflowing use of color. it appears to trickle down from the petals and paint the air, the flowers seem to be sweating hue, so thick and generous are the patches of deep blue, red, white and orange. usually only two or three main colors constitute the entire palette, they interchange and create intense compositions (usually relying on radial symmetry).
as it often happens when color takes precedence, the painterly vanquishes nearly all traces of the linear. these are the antidote to a botanical illustration: the emphasis here is on the unified whole, on the movement of humid air that soaks the painted surface and on a mystical luminescence that all but evokes mythical contemplation on the emergence of life. unusual viewing angles and an unclear generic status in most cases it is impossible to determine whether the flowers are still life or still growing contribute to the mystical mood. furthermore, the lack of detail disrupts scale perception and the flowers may appear like giants slowly moving through air. everything seems to conspire to convey something magical.
in a contrary turn, these florals succeed also in something more real and tangible: the depicted richness overstimulates the visual perception as to overflow and arouse, if only in one's mind, other senses particularly the sense of smell. the angel's trumpet you see above may seem to spread faint tinkling and accompany its heavenly ambiance. regardless of one's readiness to accept such interpretation, ignoring the sensuous abundance naturally predisposed to engage other senses would be unfair. these flowers want to smell and sound and who are we to stop them?
it would be interesting to determine the symbolical meaning of the flowers (since they lack a textual one). i think that the meaning here is of broad allusion to civilization, as it was created by the written word, in this context the aim would be to remind the audience that civilization is near, that people are around, and that that hand may indeed appear as if from nowhere and clear the view for us. so in fact this is a soothing element a somewhat paradoxical conclusion considering the alarming bright red color. on the other hand, we are being given a close-up view of the wild growth far ahead a preparation and a warning more signs of civilization.
in terms of traditional western aesthetic the flowers may act as a focal point. however, the overpowering bright reds bend this role to claim more attention and importance. this feature creates a complex net of meanings, shuffling between foreground (and civilization) and background (and wild nature). the closed compositions add a sense of tropical atmospheric heaviness that makes itself notable after some viewing time the time needed to desensitize oneself from the redness. here the water, flowing in parallel to the garlands, refreshes the air, as if putting down a fire: the artist reminds us of the relief water brings by giving it a similar role in the painterly context.
for my last review of dawn lundquist's work i wanted to choose between 
it is easy to recognize characteristic gestures: one is evidently in an attacking/advancing mode while the other is singing. the artist makes her subjects interesting and endearing not only for their plumage but also for their demeanor. the proud postures reveal fearlessness and the readiness to engage in a fight: i don't know if some of the depicted breeds are of the fighting kind, but it is easy to imagine them as such. it takes only a few long, curving and strong contour lines to condense the birds' character a linear economy that makes sense in the overall painterly context.
line is not the only element to be reduced to formal simplicity: undemanding symmetry and balance make up the bulk of the compositional conception. the artist skillfully positions the cocks near a tree, or counterpoises the head with the tail. i find the results delightful: while in terms of symmetry the left side mirrors the right side, in terms of color they produce a poignant contrast. it can be that this coexistence of balance and imbalance reflects the rooster's lazy alpha behavior i would certainly pay more attention now, when i see one.
the artist works in a variety of settings, evidently aiming at diversity, and avoiding the common pitfalls of genre painting. she does not repeat herself, but quotes, does not stand still thematically, but seeks new challenges. as a result, her oeuvre presents a rich and thorough monograph on the local landscape. for this review i have chosen the several autumnal dusky works that could, when combined, constitute a series. i like these because the brush records pristine air and evokes a tenderness of mood, with a dash of sadness. the colors compose a visual adagio that sneaks up upon the audience, softly lulling it into an evening, eyes-half-closed phase.
in order to deal with space, the artist introduces oblong visual motifs. i mentioned the trees, winding perspectives are imparted by a concurrent thick line a river, a path, a coastline, a horizon line, a shrubbery or even a prolonged shadow or glare. as we lower our eyes, the moody atmosphere clashes with the earthly perspectives and ground planes, generating a contradictory duality contained within the frame by the canvas, as if by force. as a consequence of this tense confinement, yet another color variation covers the ground in a way of energy discharge and the land glows, offering an alternative local cause of the reddening ambiance. somehow the setting sun itself becomes almost irrelevant, as the scene before us grows more self-contained and self-explanatory.
ultimately, the artist's adoption of this duality attests not only to the ability to stand on a notional edge, but also to the capacity to translate the tense equilibrium into pictorial terms all within the subtle general framework of light withdrawal. and personally, i suspect that we are being presented with a softened, mellowed version of a compound that has been through some high temperature points.
there is some restrained irony in how the bustle recedes as we enter the open sea. strangely enough, the transition does not reduce the tension but only anchors it by waves of unpredictability, imparted by the dirty blue-grays. moreover, the spray and foam that carried the light in the foreground descend, disappear and eventually transform into fog in the back. as a consequence, the vivacity and swirling is lost, and the audience is left with an unexpected cold visual application, as if a pictorial wake up and back to reality call. i think that this transition may bear the metaphorical connotation of the loss of innocence and the shift from adolescence to adulthood two inherently romantic notions.
so if i were to try and categorize these paintings stylistically, i would careen strongly towards romanticism. surely they are all-rounder than that, otherwise the artist's intent mentioned at the outset would not bear a single sea cucumber. but there is something over the top romantic in these scenes that is difficult to ignore, the whole elemental struggle scenario that works its way from exposition to epilogue with admirable perseverance. and, it is as refreshing as a breath of mediterranean sea breeze in a warm may morning.
i think that the first problem is being effectively dealt with with the assistance of rhythms created by objects rising above the surface. this is a lateral solution: the initial surprise from seeing the white is still there, but the audience is not given the time to process this first impression into a negative connotation (for instance of cold, or alienation), as the artist draws us into the view by a series of rhythmic diversions, generated by bushes and trees. the paths, originating from the lowest part of the canvas, invite narrational cooperation, and quite forcefully we are to take the path, either by foot or skis. consisting of several parallel lines, they also create a rhythmical net (not unlike a tennis net, cutting the court in half) that diverts from the general coldness. 
color solves the second problem treat the malady with its cause . the scanty growth around the paths boasts some color, however pale. moreover, a closer inspection reveals that the snow is far from white: it is covered in thin layers of gray, blue, and even orange, reflecting the sky and the light. but yes, it takes an effort to notice these, perhaps it resembles the one made to adjust to a season change. it is possible that people who rarely encounter snow would have some advantage, being less optically desensitized. i personally haven't seen real snow in many years which may just give me the needed edge.
finally, i would like to bring to your attention the abstract quotes on the mountains in the background. the range actually constitutes a remote and somewhat irregular canvas on which nature paints with snow. white and gray stripes and blots produce powerful abstract images, invoking such winter emotions as loneliness and abandonment. the artist pays tribute to nature and its artistic streak, she expresses gratitude in what may seem like a private exchange, warm enough to melt not only the snow, but the viewers' hearts as well.
the focus on a geometrical shape proves that these works are firstly abstract, secondly figurative. the irises themselves serve an auxiliary role of a thematic foil, which the audience sees through the stained-glass window squares.
there is one characteristic which, depending on individual taste, may prove to be somewhat tiresome. the cross shapes contribute to a certain symmetry which may feel oppressive after awhile. the artist solves this problem in other variations, the orchid nine patch (print below) being an example of blissful imbalance that nevertheless retains the cross. it seems as though the artist was hesitant to go all abstract in the irises and compensated for his irresolution by taking more risks in the orchids. eventually the abstract tendencies prevail over the flowers as the true experimental subject matter of the series.
once again there is the temptation to try and guess the meaning of the colors, especially because most of them actually do not invite a straightforward likeness to something familiar. while the green and the blue parts most probably allude to a marine background, the yellowish-beige and the dark red seem indecipherable, and almost enigmatic. one reminds of sand and hot sun, but may just as well depict water under different lighting. the other projects a strong dusky vibe, but may in fact represent a part of an interior, which in turn would denote the flowers as still life. the artist tests his color formula in a different setting harsh conditions and proves its effectiveness once more.
focusing solely on the decorative element gradually reveals that there is a full landscape distributed between the parts of whole. interestingly, the mood makes itself felt even without a visual reconstruction, the general impression is of an autumnal, warm day progressing towards its end a touch of romance and sadness with a large dose of warm optimism. the red of the flowers accords perfectly with the shades of brown, yellow and wine-red. the irregular form of the stems and the blooms enlivens the strict linear division. ultimately, this painting relaxes and instills feelings of security because all elements complement each other without breaking into the other's thematic territory.
the humorous part consists of the artist's invitation to play tag and try and recreate a more coherent landscape. the thing is, i don't think it's possible it seems as though the painter cheats a little, teasing the audience. the semblance of a game tricks the viewers to fix their gaze on the piece for a little longer than usual, and absorb all that warm welcoming energy. the somewhat confusing light square in the middle serves as a vacuum area that catches the viewer's attention, which then would be diffused between the peripheral squares. eventually, this central point of entry gives the piece its edge: it keeps the color scheme slightly off-balance and reminds us that this is an abstract work of art after all.
as a fan of pure abstract art i have to admit that i tend to view these works as a compromise. i am more prepared to judge them as exciting experiments that haven't quite worked out. the combination of flowers and abstract geometry flourishes in the more austere, malevich (and maybe 
in fact, they don't seem to perform any kind of task at all and may appear outright redundant. there is, however, a way to solve this problem and it seems that don li-leger is actually moving in this direction: regarding the works as pastiches rather than paintings . pastiche seems like a more viable and appropriate genre category, it puts the viewer on a different path, unveils the artwork from a fresh perspective, and gives it a new life. now there is no need for harmony, on the contrary, the less of it the better. blossoms assume aesthetic meaning on their own right and the paintings become rich depositories of various stylistic features. perhaps the artist achieves his synthesis after all.
i would like to contend the entire trend of psychoanalytical interpretation of visual artwork, since it was instituted by 
there is enough substance in this painting to examine and analyze without resorting to dr. freud's equivocal postulates. a group of three (or four) girls stands on a bridge, the young women gazing into the lake, studying the reflections caught on the surface. the water serves as a mirror, looking into which may mean a search for knowledge and understanding a known motif in western art. consequently, the tree near the shore may represent the one of knowledge, which, in its biblical connotation, may also refer to sexual intercourse.
thus, though we eventually arrive to an interpretation that withholds some erotic meaning, the route taken relies on common iconography rather then abstruse psychoanalytic guess-work (and i would stress the difference). additionally, munch was known to study the complexities of the attraction between the sexes, as such works as 
the road and the landscape begin to swirl (a technique munch employs in 
nostalgia is often in the danger of slipping into 
similar to his madonna, edvard munch went on to explore the theme of several girls standing on a long elevation above water, creating several versions of the painting, 
the swirling contours, a motif that recurs in 
and yet, even this quintessential attribute of sainthood is married with the material form. the color of the halo embellishes the navel and the nipples: points that allude to the processes of carrying a child, giving birth, and feeding the offspring. by strategic color distribution, munch notionally links madonna's sainthood with reproductive signals of her body, reminding that by being the physical mother of christ, she performs a divinely assigned task. her very own body becomes the vehicle for her saintly purpose and cause. this juxtaposition of material and spirit also anticipates the dual transcendent nature of christ, at once corporeal and godlike.
munch created a 
generally considered a symbolist who prefigured expressionism, munch can sometimes exhibit the impassioned, elemental thrust of 
munch suggests feelings by strategically juxtaposing his actors in space and against each other, he shows how gestures and outward demeanor can betray inner turmoil. by distorting or 
all of these methods culminate in 
the defining element of the painting inevitably becomes the girl at the center, dressed in orange-red (slightly swirling), a color known to symbolize sexual attraction and passion. this color indicates the underlying reason for the congregation an artist's method to narrate the scene on the level of general human experience.
she and her mate resemble the rest of the couples, and it seems that they are- being picked out for their compositionally central locus, not a specific feature. all of the dancing young women could be painted the same orange-red to the same effect, but it makes more painterly sense to colorize the figure that happened to be at the center the symbolic stand-in for the rest.
the chaotic, dreamy dynamism of the composition prompts to interpret the foreground of the image outside the immediate context of time and place. instead of being their own actors, the two women on the edges manifest possible emotional developments of the central female character. as it sometimes occurs in dreams, the mind clones the protagonist into several alter-actors, one to the left, another to the right.
thus, these two girls embody the red dressed lady's hopes and fears, one of matrimony and happiness (the white dress), the other of death, abandonment, and mourning (the black dress). conversely, the procession may suggest a chronological setup: the girl's adult life begins from left, with 
a helpful comparison can be drawn between munch's dance of life and various marc chagall's, the norwegian's- contemporary, couples. chagall usually painted young, embracing men and women, often husband and wife, surrounded by different idiosyncratic symbols, the models often appear to float, hover, or levitate disjointed from physical space.
despite some structural parallels, chagall's lovers differ from munch's in that they tend to reveal warm and calm behavior, displaying tenderness, understanding, and acceptance, all enwrapped in certainty and confidence. the northern painter's somber subjects betray tension, unresolved desires, and psychological obstacles quite removed from the dreamy vivaciousness of the jewish artist.
the main artistic device in this sketchy, almost primitive composition is the line: munch fully exploits the possibilities of this important tool, putting it to painterly, as well as psychological (expressionist) effect. color plays a no less important, but subordinate role (the black and white lithograph exemplifies how the painting retains its punch even after being discolored).
there are two kinds of lines, the wavy serpentine ones that constitute the landscape and delineate the protagonist, and the straight ones that form the bridge. i think it is possible to envisage the lines as visual metaphors of madness and sanity, respectively. the artist juxtaposes them, and thus produces immense tension, channeled into the crying person's head as the closest and most obvious receptacle: the head is the vertex of a global compositional triangle the sky, the beach and the bridge.
as a result of absorbing all this tension a process imposed by the composition the figure begins to suffer an overload, and hold its head in distress. in other words, there is a clear compositional logic to explain, or underpin, the psychologically laden connotation of an individual being suppressed, terrorized, or persecuted by his surroundings. this perfect convergence of compositional organization with allegorical narrative becomes one of the chief elements to make this work such a potent and lasting icon.
the bridge represents an island island of sanity to which the screamer escaped from below, carrying in him the characteristics of that particular 
color not only reaffirms the tension but further enhances it, to the point of rendering the viewing experience uneasy. yellows and reds battle with the blues and the greens, the skyline becomes the front line.
there is something theatrical about the whole set-up: the beach is the pit and the bridge is the gallery, the play itself is insignificant it's someone from the audience who steals the show, by running from the spectacle being given. the sky becomes the curtain that hangs from above and threatens to cover and consume the scene on the stage (the lake), which by now may be viewed only as a farce.
by evoking the allegory of life as a stage, the artist offers a social commentary. but it is also a personal commentary a personal experience. everyone is the protagonist in their own play, and the painting addresses the individual actor (spectator) more than the mass of participants as a whole.
while this allegory of a theater may interfere with the purity of the expressionistic concept, and breach its innate mystery, it also provides a familiar model of human relations to help the audience understand the image. honore de balzac demonstrated just how cruel and unforgiving these relations can be in his aptly ironically named cycle the human comedy. 
lines play an important compositional and conceptual part: piercing and deep, they run through the entire canvas as if trying to break out and continue beyond it, generating an effect of pulsating speed the speed of light that overpowers the observer. the web of rays clashes with the calm instilled by the rocks and the beach, while the fitting scoop-like shape of the shore barely contains it.
two interrelated compositional levels emerge: the first- taking shape above the center of the painting, mostly in yellow and white, formed by the circle of the sun and the yellow radial grid, and the second- consisting of the outside landscape, which absorbs all the colors of the rainbow.
it seems that the former bright epicenter produces the most visual energy (not unlike in an atomic explosion), whereas the rest of the piece works to dissipate and contain it. this is a classic hot versus cold palette juxtaposition put to a compositional (and psychological) effect.
the sun and its reflection produce the shape of a light bulb, which could allude to the use of artificial light though there seems to be much more supernatural than simply artificial to this image. it's as if the artist wished shake the viewers, cast them out of their comfort zone (the serene beach and the rocks) and confront them with a powerful all encompassing element, dangerous and unpredictable.
there is something iconic, in a religious sense, about this sun, an underlying energy that evokes ancient creed and rituals. it's an enigmatic and complex painting (somewhat reminiscent, for instance, of 
though it is obviously the physical weight and the shape of the armor that impedes the saint in his task, a broader symbolic interpretation suggests itself: the rich, secular and earthly (the ore used for making the plates literally being extracted from the ground) garments interfere with one's progression towards holiness, as, for instance, was exemplified by st. francis. correspondingly, the protagonist is indeed depicted in the process of shedding his garb, cutting off a part of his robe in order to give it away to the naked beggar. the violence of the act clashes with the serene humility of the actors, generating electrifying atmosphere the city of toledo, depicted in the background, serves as the ground connection for this cycle, linking the two abstracts to a particular locale and providing an essential counterbalance.
the blue sky enframing the figures resembles very much a liquid threatening to drown everything in an engulfing cascade. it comes to mind that perhaps this is what the horse so urgently senses animals being very in tune with upcoming changes in nature. regardless, the cold (and to my mind somewhat repelling) hue creates a portending sense of uneasiness and unresolved tension, and even the blazing white color of the ungulate forces us to look away or concentrate on the vision before us by overcoming emotional distress and making some sort of a spiritual achievement. in a way, this is a very personal communication of the artist's faith, so intimate, it is difficult to continuously witness. though it is clear what is about to happen in terms of action, the multitude of unfinished and impending things in terms of composition and palette casts an overwhelming sense of mystery and uncertainty making this canvas a mesmerizing piece of art.
though i am only familiar with spanish physiognomy from literary descriptions and television, i believe that el greco tapped into the basic pattern of facial features of people inhabiting the peninsula. inherently pale and dark-haired, the men depicted at the gathering look characteristically spanish, it's difficult to determine whether the melancholia is another intrinsic quality, or simply one emanating as the naturally resulting mood of the sombre event. the artist endows his actors with local physical peculiarities this is a normally accepted strategy, perfected by michelangelo, who used quarry workers as models for his sculptures and paintings. viewers would recognize the type and connect more willingly with the image. in fact, the only obvious factor linking both scenes is the physical similarity: both saints and mortals possess resembling features.
the broadness and scope of the ethereal part of the painting reminds me of hieronymus bosch's large scale portrayals of heaven and hell. el greco's rendering similarly contains numerous independent activities that cohere harmoniously into a unified devotional vision. bosch's wild imagination has led him to somatic inventions, but of a kind that differed stylistically from those of the south-european: where the former preferred to transplant inanimate mechanical objects, the latter elongated the flesh of his painted subjects, making their torsos and limbs exceptionally mannerist and beyond. i think that eventually there are two paintings on this canvas (
but that is not to say that composition is somehow ineffective. on the contrary, it interweaves harmoniously with the main concept of color, as a sort of adornment, or mounting (the rest literally encircle christ) -the inquisition jailed the artist for putting christ in the center, instead of high above his tormentors. the effectiveness of the composition in this case equals a reduction of sorts. while color appeals to emotional and psychic perception, composition and arrangement per se address the logical brain. perhaps, logic is irrelevant here: the powerful palette suggests that emotional response is more adequate than any mental processing. el greco's preference of unmixed hues also indicates his aiming at the most primal emotions.
facial expressions, particularly that of christ himself, complements the tragic atmosphere. his countenance is unusually serene in the midst of the clamor, the white complexion already radiating the divine light of sainthood of inner and/or outer source. the haughty, mocking physiognomy of the guard wearing the green robe, transported here along with some other biblical contemporaries, in the painterly tradition of combining the historical with the modern, is a direct opposite. shadow covers his face, implying on the darkness of the force that moves him. the foreshortened worker in the yellow, below, appears fully engrossed in his morbid task, while the two females (the two marys?) in the lower left part observe in apprehension. finally, the armored man to christ's right, gazing in melancholia at the viewer, and the two nearly mad offenders behind them anchor the emotional arch of the painting from one end to another.
the third thing was the gradation of skin tones. every face has its own distinctive shade, together they create a coordinated rhythm of color, further underlined by similar distribution of hue intensity of the robes. the darker the face, the darker the garment. perhaps the purpose of the gradation was to suggest an hierarchy between the saints on the canvas. there is another interesting feature: the eyes are all blackened, as if masked in deep shadow. this choice of palette contributes to the sense of mystery, as we stand unable to decipher the innermost feelings of the saints from their eyes. in fact, pockets of black scattered throughout the image secretly impose an atmosphere of tension, enigma and vagueness. the colder blue and white of the sky balance it only to some degree, as the violent opposition of reds and yellows with the black sets the principal tone.
the composition also offers a series of clashes. there are several imaginary perpendicular angles (the fourth thing): between the head of st. joseph and the baby's body, between his arm and his foot, st. anne's head and the baby, the latter and madonna's breast, his miniature hand and her long, scissor-like fingers (intersecting only slightly off the center of the piece). mary's head, in another characteristically raphaelian tilt, becomes the central axis of the configuration, in a superb harmony of design, the compositional device unites with the notional christian concept. despite the general two dimensional setting, foreshortened faces add just the amount of perspective and depth needed for the beholder to perceive the image relatively easily. still the, the setting is evidently abstract and forces the viewer to higher realms of imagination and fancy.
the green growth in the foreground provides an antidote to the urban setting, albeit due to the dark mood it is difficult to define it as pastoral. still, the artist efficiently presents the dichotomy of nature and an inhabited space, and carries through the rich idea of wilderness both tamed and intimidating. venturing outside the city walls seems like a daunting task, but a possible one, and, a tempting one. a technical motif of chaos vs. order, obvious in the 
i want to suggest an interesting comparison with giorgione's (el greco studied in venice earlier in his career) 
stylistically, these are sure-handed works i enjoy the robust, swift brushwork in particular enriched with impressionistic water reflections. it is strange how a degree of randomness exposes a firm brush where too much thought and planning would do the same to an uncertain one. here, the generally chaotic distribution of color used to create a believable illusion of the water surface does the former. in other parts, this is impressionism on condition: sunlight emaciated the boats' color, which seems ready to crack, peel off and reveal the dirty gray and red of metal and corrosion. it's as if there is some realist intent encroaching, preparing to take over after sundown. overall, the extremely bright sunlight sets the tone and adds an energizing touch of urgency.
to conclude, i would like to offer a comparison to 
to capture vast space without overloading the viewer, the artist keeps things simple in terms of composition and color. i think these choices benefit the theme: hue harmony and compositional flow take precedence over small detail in panoramic landscapes, and particularly so in small paintings. yet there are subtle elaborations, sophisticated color overlaps and gradations that reveal a tendency towards maximal precision. as a result, i found myself struggling to make out the buildings from the town contours, and the trees behind the meadow (the painting below). by giving the viewers the impression that they indeed could, the artist may have achieved his main goal.
to conclude this series of reviews of frank gardner's work, i would like to say that i find his use of light, though at times harsh for viewing, emotionally exhilarating. thematically, some of his mexican farm paintings exhibit a gentle romantic pastoral streak (when the workers appear from afar, moving away from the viewer) , while others are more realist (when they work right in front of the audience, moving towards it). finally, his work displays such a clear compositional vision and unity of design that if asked to describe it in just a few words, i would say: he always gets his point across. 
the massive walls overlook the small figures yet, somehow, seem sleepy and appeased (at the first glance), as if exhausted by the sun. the buildings resemble giants though i would not necessarily vouch for their gentleness. they store a lot of energy, and it's unclear how it could erupt, if at all, and for what reason. i think that eventually this indeterminacy and lack of will emphasize human control and domination. indeed, the architectural motif of the building in the piece you see below, if personified, would appear subservient: imitating the paws of a giant sphinx, with claws retracted before the walking woman, or a face with its gaze directed downward, in an expression of obedience.
to sum up, a few words (more in the following reviews) on frank gardner's style. his choices of sometimes very surprising locations and edgy, unconventional compositions that produce unexpected geometrical shapes, labyrinths or heavily unbalanced configurations, they all point to high painterly confidence. original viewing angles reveal a master whose foremost skill may lie in identifying the best location for his next painting, at least when working en plein air. often i feel as if presented with an object or a theme from the side of the tail rather than of the head a creative attitude that signifies a fresh approach, one which apparently became the norm for the artist.
the artist utilizes portraiture to construct an effective and flexible tool of psychological analysis. three major trends, which may also be viewed as distinct stages-in each-particular analysis, emerge as the tool's core components: profile, en face and close-up portrayals. in some cases the latter conjoins with the other two as a formal auxiliary element, bringing the model farther from or closer to the viewer but, it assumes an independent role, not dissimilar to that of a sub-genre, when radically foregrounded. combined, these categories constitute a conceptual blueprint an artistic framework with the outspoken purpose of variety and the underlying purpose of systematic psychological excavation.
the endeavor to create a phased, relatively three dimensional replica of a model reflects the desire to present her or him as a nuanced and complex human being. interestingly, more often than not, a single model would enjoy only one of the stages. it doesn't matter: the artist's method should be seen as a grand scheme for tapping into the human condition as a whole rather than into a particular individual psyche. i think it is up to the audience and other artists to decide whether this method has a universal value but it's individual worth for the artist is unquestionable, as the portraits consistently display a spectrum of mental and emotional experiences, from ironic self-awareness to quiet and timid introspection, from embarrassed self-consciousness to spontaneous expressions of joy.
settings and accessories play an important part in adding psychological bulk to viewer's mental image of the depicted, particularly because many of the portraits, and especially the self portraits, appear to be carefully staged. the artist's choice of subject matter in this sphere leads me to conclude that her models concern themselves with transitions. for instance, the bed as a place of transition from the state of waking to the state of sleep or from life to death in a more generalized interpretation (which i prefer). the wedding dress may symbolize a transition from loneliness (or solitude) to a communal form of living, from hiding to sharing, and so on. it's easy to see that these common to all mankind themes resonate with that grand scheme mentioned above.
there is a compositional rigor to it all: the paintings carefully balance chaos with calm by clear-cut borders. first, sharp angles between various tree parts generate a sense of urgency and aggression while the woods seem to move and expand, as the general upward direction indicates. second, all these movements and threats are either pruned by the frame or carefully contained by the trees themselves: the branches aim at the local center of the piece (where the trees concentrate) or above, where they collide and in a way neutralize each other. finally, bordering trunks (or lowest branches) enwrap the entire display and isolate it from the rest of the piece, proving how harmless the show really is.
thus the paintings are divided into compositional segments, more violent ones including criss crossing lines and sharp edged triangles and the quiet ones consisting of wavy patches of snow or curved lines contouring a forest or a river bank. it is interesting that snow, after melting, turns into water which in turn would feed the trees and put on a coat of leaves on them. trees with foliage trolls appeased with mead are no longer menacing. a scene in the painting above, where the river water divides (or in fact connects) between the woods visually foreshadows this paradigm. eventually, the trolls get their mead and we get our story.
the crab and the fishes owe their liveliness to the artist's eye for movement. the animals appear to be in motion, complemented either by an expressive shadow, or other fish. as fits such themes, the paintings rely on humor for thematic interest: the slant threatens to knock the crab off its feet and put the critter in a comic for us situation. the fishes, swimming around in a crowd, appear in a funny pattern that is both familial and familiar. the high viewing angle allows us to absorb the rich oranges. despite the sea setting, the artist gives us an aquarium simulation.
i like these pieces for their harmony and their light, summery feel. the word effortless gets thrown about a lot recently, but there is definitely a dash of that ease here achieved, no doubt, with considerable effort. the artist finds points of interest and complex shadow without making them the sole focus of the compositions. these paintings are about the waves of water, of sand, of light. holly lombardo aptly condensed the warmth and spirit of summer into several sunny watercolors.
the singular theme would appear to exclude composition from playing a major part, but enter the colors and claim compositional territory. it is interesting that the rather pale colors end up serving the paintings in terms of space rather than light or palette but perhaps not surprising. the windows are basically collections of geometrical forms very fortunately arranged abstract pieces. the diffused colors, though provide thematic background, can be approached as geometrical additions dispersed in areas across the paper. this color deconstruction adds another dimension to the artwork. perhaps it compensates for the inability to peek in and see what happens beyond the panes, the curtains and the reflections.
lines play an important, but underlying role. they criss-cross he windows yet somehow stay out of sight, bury themselves into the theme. i think that the lines add another dark aspect that works quietly against the sun and the light, and adds tension to the whole premise. lines in such close disposition are bound to allude to prison bars and jails allusions that elucidate the paintings from a completely different angle, and, in a way, put them to the test. by isolating a trivial everyday object the artist lays bare a series of emotions, associations and experiences that are nothing trivial, and all uneasy and complex.
what appeals to me in particular in this medium is the role of the text i see it as an old friend making a cameo appearance. because ming's comics contain so much neutral space, the few lines that express the protagonist's thoughts or the artist's commentary (and sometime it is difficult to distinguish between the two) have the visual expanse to reverberate and seep into the reader's mind. additionally, they provide an inside glance into the artist's verbal way of thinking, which for some may be the more accessible one. i almost compulsively start guessing what would he say about his paintings, to elucidate or reinterpret the title.
basically, i hope that anyone and everyone will find the guide helpful in one way or another. there are no specific requirements i use very little special language and aim to speak in plain and clear terms. this, in fact, is the philosophy behind this whole publication. i hope that high school and undergraduate college/university students, working artists, art bloggers, art lovers and anyone who has the faintest interest in art will enjoy this guide.
i am aware that many of the things said will sound trivial and not particularly innovative. however, it is always the obvious ideas that slip our mind and undermine the quality of our writing: their absence creates nagging shortcomings, identifying them may also seem annoyingly impossible. for those of you who may feel like they already know everything mentioned here, i would like to say: these posts may serve you as a reminder or a reference source for your knowledge.
although visual arts are the declared main focus, i believe that the guide may be useful for any kind of creative writing, even fiction. as an english undergraduate student writing essays i always visualized, even when trying to express the most abstract ideas. perhaps i realized a little too late that i should deal with images directly, i am trying to make up for it as i am typing these words. it is strange that i wouldn't be able to had i once not been an english undergraduate student...
vladimir nabokov, one of my favorite writers once said that the optimal audience he can imagine for himself consists of a room full of nabokov clones people who think and read exactly like the writer and would understand him immediately and without reservations. i think that although there may be some truth to this vision, it is a somewhat elitist and unproductive attitude. i believe that everybody can and should enjoy art.
a room full of people sounds nice but to my mind all present must be different, coming from diverse backgrounds, carrying multifarious cultural contexts and impregnated with a set of their own ideas and ideals. i want the opposite of nabokov's vision. but he's still my favorite.
yes, just like in the movie
i am surrounded by engineers and almost everyone in my family, close and remote alike, is in the sciences. so in a way, i am like remi the rat. something tells me that there are quite a few rats out there. well, it's time we built ourselves a colony and began expanding. no more guilt about loving art.
one of the purposes of this guide is to reassure you that this whole process can be done, learned and mastered absolutely regardless of any innate talent or ability. of course some are more likely to enjoy art interpretation and critique, but, first, you need to try it, see if you like it or not, and then decide you may suddenly discover that you derive great pleasure from this most stimulating mental activity. but regardless of the results, remember: all people possess imagination, and using it is a matter of technique that can be learned and acquired.
another underlying goal is to demythologize the process: we all like to poke fun at the wannabe connoisseurs, who stand in front of a painting and mumble something about the colorful colors. but why not to take a closer look at the source of the myth and debunk it? you may discover that art interpretation is not that difficult and that the joke has long become passe.
separate chapters can be useful for different purposes. each post is designed to be an independent small piece of writing including a few main ideas and suggestions on how to elaborate on them. wherever a reader lands, s/he should be able to derive something from what s/he reads...
we discussed millet tendency to sentimentalize his subjects in 
an animal flanking the protagonist to hint at character traits is a rhetorical instrument used elsewhere by the artist. in the shepherdess, a dog appears not far from the young model, implying faithfulness, the quintessential canine quality, dogs are known to symbolize loyalty in visual arts, as 
the way the three girls are arranged brings to mind another millet's work, the renowned 
the theme of a solitary working peasant reoccurs also in the knitter (see image below), as well as in 
the girl appears to be clutching a rosary and praying taking a break from shepherding to serve a different master. the sheep behind her may imply being a part of a religious flock, as obedient and subservient as the grazing animals. the flock counterbalances the girl, the entire- group producing the shape of a cross turned ninety degrees clockwise reinforcing a religious metaphoric reading. millet offers a smooth, obvious transition from the literal to the figurative.
downcast gaze, a trademark motif in millet's models, suggests a depressed state of mind, a weak, downtrodden existence. downcast eyes can be a powerful and expressive psychological instrument: johannes vermeer, the dutch baroque painter, deployed it quite often, depicting his actors, servants as well as masters, lowering their gaze and directing their attention to the task at hand. 
even if we assume that millet's subjects could read and write, their placement against a bleak landscape backdrop (as opposed to vermeer's interiors) removes the possibility of leisure that these activities require. millet's peasants lack the calm and confidence of vermeer's models, they appear unable to transcend themselves through self-education. instead, their transcendence becomes a cause to be taken up by the artist himself.
the worried faces of these young women convey suffering and sadness, some sort of malaise or dissatisfaction, however suppressed or contained. they seem to find neither joy, nor peace in their work, which consumes them completely. it's a state of- thorough hopelessness. in turn, the endlessness of the sky and the land emphasize the girl's vulnerability, pushing her towards the viewers, almost forcing an intimate encounter. the overall image is programmed to evoke pity and sympathy.
the boundaries of the canvas, cutting abruptly both the plain and the sky, appear to be the only restraints of nature's sheer expanses. hence, the artist becomes the girl's protector, generously fitting the frame as if after searching for a perfect angle with a camera to capture her safely and neatly with the flock, and tone down the effect of being rendered frighteningly insignificant by the elements. here millet's sentimentality becomes the very method- by which he transcends his shepherdess, at least in art, to greener pastures.
 space also crystallizes through the dissections, through similar indirect, though perhaps more concrete influence. simply by slicing the objects or including them partially the artist implies that they are the disposable occupants of the room, and that the space they fill bears precedence. interestingly, the included parts often form an approximate circle, surrounding... nothing, that is, space. furthermore, the corners of the rugs, the seat-back, the chest, the bed, the window, they all tend to point towards the center, the empty space. even the window curtain, tied and sliced, seems to try to embrace the air, all the while freeing the view into the greater space outside. i will risk a tautology and state that space needs space, and that the compositional device of pulling objects outside the frame provides it.
and here's a look at the artist's studio. this photo is from 
artistic logic is similarly visible in the choice of background color: deep brown reiterates the hue of the chocolate, while the bright lilac that of the filling. the totality of repetition calls up the richness of the flavor, seeking to allude to taste through color. in a delicious turn, the taste doesn't retrace to the same palette: in my mind, the flavor of the sweet stuff transcends into silver sparks and stars, and bright blue swirls, all on a background of golden foil the artist avoids monotony through the power of individual association. in a way, the painter capitalizes on our past experiences, aiming at them, and making the paintings a kind of a subconscious conduit to previous tastings.
chocolate is a known afrodisiac, and the above painting conveys that quality in a most subtle, or straightforward depending on the viewer manner. the bitten, half melted bonbon implies the tasting of a fruit of a different kind, and the tempting berry inside may prompt to extend the metaphor even further (the chocolate compartment indeed appears to guard it from some impatient sweet tooth). the reddish tones may suggest blushing or the rushing of blood to other body parts... anyway, we sometimes tend to associate red and its varieties with sexual thoughts and actions. i think that the general warm atmosphere encourages erotic fantasies after all, it is in our blood, which, as it happens, is also red.
i would like to discuss one of the most explored subjects by the artist, the florals. in some ways, jeanne illenye's floral pieces are the least characteristic of her style. the extreme close ups deviate from the pattern of bouquets presented at a distance so calm we ignore it, here the proximity becomes one of the active principles of the composition, one to be reckoned with, rather than dismissed as an auxiliary technical/geometrical aspect to the painting as a whole. such proximity inevitably invites close inspection, analysis and conclusion making every stage being inherently suffused with considerable intensity. the dark, often black backgrounds increase the tension even further.
still, it is important to emphasize that these frictions occur within the definitive framework of global calm and control, being unable to break through and establish some kind of chaos. though, i must admit, sometimes it feels pretty close to the verge just another addition to that tension, this time from the aspect of formal evaluation. overall, the florals exposed with the zoom in (botanical) effect, and the more serene ones fill in the niche to its utmost limits. the artist proves her mastery of the field by exhibiting superb technical execution, as well as by the effortless transition from one sub-genre to another, eliciting admiration for both.
the painting divides into three planes, unequal in importance and the space they occupy. first is the landscape in the background: it lends the image depth, as if letting it breathe, and counterbalances the protagonist, it itself divides into two complementing zones, the reddish terrestrial, and the bluish aquatic (and mountainous). the sky appears to combine the two tones, showing a blue azure touched with red and brown hues. overall, the landscape creates a profound sense of harmony, matching the mystique of the lady with its own foggy atmosphere.
mona lisa herself comprises the second, and the primary, plane. sitting in an upright position, with perhaps just a hint of tension in her neck and back, she as well can be compositionally deconstructed into two main areas: the upper, which includes the face and the chest, and the lower, which includes the arms and the hands. the third plane consists of a few vaguely visible, yet structurally important elements at the lower part of the panel: the armrest (or the seat-back), and the tentatively outlined balcony fence. these two parts delineate the immediate boundaries within which the figure rests.
la gioconda's face displays youth and maturity at the same time. the condition of her skin its freshness can be discerned through the gauze of the sfumato (and many years of atmospheric effects) reveals the former, whereas her confident pose and outlook attest to the latter. notoriously, she lacks eyebrows and eyelashes.
as the young lady looks slightly to the right of the viewer, her eyes squint a little, miming thoughtfulness perhaps this is an inner gaze that visualizes a memory, or recalls an event. as a result, she appears to look past the viewer, through us and at the same at us, she is present, but her mind is elsewhere. this very duality acts as a source of endless mystery and fascination, and is one of the reasons for the portrait's enigma.
interestingly, there are no apparent wrinkles that usually accompany squinting, making her focus slightly supernatural, as if occurring in and of itself.
a portrait subject's hands will often reveal more intent than its face. the hands frequently become an iconography agent, holding an object a letter, a book, a scepter, a weapon, a flower, a ring that bespeaks not only the meaning, but also the designed mood and the purpose of the painting. mona lisa's hands, completely empty and holding nothing, thus emerge as yet another element that amplifies the enigma.
while gioconda's palms do not hold any iconographic detail, the way she folds and rests them can betray character traits. they can but don't, as what we see matches exactly her countenance a serene, restrained cross that withholds more than it shows. resulting is a harmonious psychological continuity that, along with the landscape, creates a consummate vision that remains largely impenetrable, however compositionally consistent.
in the overall scheme the use of sfumato produces a complex local interplay of light and shadow. it is a very dynamic visual device that can be especially effective in a portrait an essentially static image. sometimes, perhaps just like in the software, it can be overused, and establish an incompatibility between the light source and the sheer amount and richness of the shadows.
in mona lisa sfumato frames the sitter's eyes (almost like an eye makeup), the mouth, and the entire face oval, as the gradations of shade weave a mutable, shifting grid. while shadows underscore the physical reality of the model, their fuzzy softness places her in a kind of remote, removed space. she hence becomes both attainable and unattainable, worldly feminine and ethereally angelic, gently intimate and coolly aloof.
leonardo painted three other female portraits, all of which evince a considerably more legible degree of expressiveness, be it a display of pride and self-worth, or humility and nobility. they are easier to read, but they are, perhaps, less interesting because of that, giving away too much.
and yet the artist didn't start a trend in portraiture where painters would seek to enshroud their models in mystery, on the contrary, psychological precision rather than ambiguity has become the universally sought for standard, including by some of the greatest visual artists.
perhaps for that reason one that has had many years to be overturned, yet remained steadfast the mona lisa remains unique daring to ask whether she was real at all.
as da vinci narrows in on the faces of the apostles, their features, highly agitated, become vehicles of emotional expressions as the artist understood them. here he may be giving the viewers a glance into his own emotional realm. via their behavior he pours out his own sentiment.
consequently, the schematic linear disposition of the actors becomes a straightforward and powerful compositional tool, as it imposes on observers a certain way of viewing. the air and light in the room and the landscape beyond it appear to absorb, and perhaps diffuse some of the tension developing at the table. the micro level can do the same, as discussed further in this review.
back to da vinci's vision: at the table, the immediacy of the gestures exposes heartfelt, genuine, piercing emotions and here, i think, lies the work's chief strength. overall, the sense of irrevocable loss that persists in the atmosphere of the image seems at once bittersweet and monumental.
for comparison, michelangelo could rarely, if at all (perhaps with the exception of pieta), delve into such intricate details of responses: he preferred to hover in heroic and symbolic spheres. leonardo impregnates the actors with unrest that literally lingers forever, enveloping viewers, percolating through our eyes into the depth of our souls.
the painting divides into five distinct groups: four clusters of three apostles, which flank a fifth central figure of jesus of nazareth. according to 
da vinci relies on a classic linear formula, but enhances it with as much sophistication and elegance as possible to avoid any formulaic traps. the systematically granulated set-up adheres to the ideals of renaissance by employing triangular/pyramidal shapes, and maintaining symmetry between the apostle clusters.
while christ acts as a central axis, the two groups on the left mirror their counterparts on the right. already here a compositional solution serves to support the theological idea behind it jesus as a central axis of christian faith.
the protagonist, occupying the center of the composition, grabs the attention immediately, his expression revealing resignation and acceptance. christ's isolation (he is the only character not to come in contact with any other of the sitting) reaffirms the melancholy appearance. his features bespeak an air of the supernatural, of being removed from earthly concerns.
recognizing judas the antagonist is made easier by his clenched fist (where he apparently holds a salt shaker, salt literally being the equivalent of money, as the word salary indicates), a gesture contrasting with christ's open palms. taken aback by the fact that his betrayal is already known, judas goes on to betray more: his bulging eyes show a mix of fear and disbelief.
jesus christ becomes the figure where the composition and its emotive content converge and mature, achieving a full measure of development. towards him everything flows, and at the same time, he acts as an agent, or source, from whence energy emanates.- it's possible to suggest that this dual quality tentatively reflects the theological precept of the twofold, co-existing nature of being both man and god.
as opposed to jesus, the apostles demonstrate decidedly human behavior. grief, surprise, denial, anger, disbelief they are all there, creating an intense wave that seems to break, as if magically, at the rock which is the shape of the savior.
the way in which the prophet's detached, ethereal disposition suspends the turmoil of his adherents, right at the epicenter of the image, creates a clash of immense psychological force. a full scale tragedy unfolds: some already begin to mourn, christ already communicates catharsis.
reading closely, one by one, the apostles' responses may diffuse some of the narrative tension, just as the atmosphere around them may do the same . lacking the shocking purity of their leader, their reactions intermix. observing and deciphering their conversations offers some entertainment value, as viewers (and especially believers) can more easily identify with these emotions.
there's a touch of mundane in the details of feet and sandals, gesticulation, intricate changes in facial musculature all of which hark back to da vinci's interest in observing faces and recording typical and atypical traits.
eventually, the time it takes to go over the four groups, to take note of all the subtle characterizations, deflects somewhat the thrust of the first reaction. it allows us to enjoy the artwork on a level of portraiture, and return to the center equipped with more context and meaning.
while close-ups half-open a door into da vinci's own emotional landscape, zooming out shuts such vistas, placing the focus on various technical, global aspects, on contours rather than what they delineate. in the latter instance we are given a chance to admire the painter, in the former, the man behind the painter.
can the two be truly separated is a question that's bound, so it seems, to remain open.
indeed, the image may appear idyllic at first a love-drenched family scene with a pet but its underlying dark motifs gradually take shape as we lower our gaze and look closer at the child. da vinci makes him reveal his purpose in subtle motions and gestures: he holds the lamb in a such a way as to create a juxtaposition between its head and his own. his inquisitive, ambiguous look narrates his actions: look at us, mother, we're exactly the same. 
in front of us is a dynamic composition that's barely contained by the classic pyramid shape: every actor moves and interacts with the others, threatening to break the triangular boundaries which may appear somewhat artificial as a result.
st. anne is removed from christ and his martyrdom both generationally and via visual hierarchy, a distance also emphasized by mary's sudden rush downwards, away from her mother, towards the child. physically, the matriarch tops the group, and appears the largest of the participants. as our eyes travel down, the shapes become smaller but their significance grows in inverse proportion, as they accumulate more symbolism.
the emotional force of the virgin's impulse towards her son anticipates another christian canon, the pieta. the child's grip on the lamb symbolizes how tightly linked apparently with all his limbs, as he would be with the cross he is to the sacrifice the animal represents. he guides the lamb to look up at the mother, as if saying i am it, and it is me, forcing the parent to acknowledge the forthcoming passion.
by being placed between the madonna and the lamb, small jesus is made to mark a stage between his human start and divine purpose. such compositional placement allows to infer the concept of the duality of christ, as he absorbs from both ends, uniting them into one. he is made a mediator, reflecting his function of connecting between believing christians and god.
to give his ideas a powerful visual anchor, da vinci creates a memorable repetition effect of outstretched hands. we see both madonna and child extend their hands in an almost identical embracing motion, the repetition generates a visual rhythm, as our eyes go back and forth, following the saints as they return each other's glances.
the misty, grand, mountainous landscape in the background encourages contemplation, much like it is reflected in st. anne's face. she, like us, is an almost external observer, removed somewhat from the mother and son physically, allowed to literally keep her head in the clouds.
in the louvre version the angel breaks the fourth wall by making eye contact with the viewer and pointing at the proceedings. he engages the audience, acting as a mediator between the saints and the observer, and claims a dual existence in the surrounding physical and the meta-physical quite appropriate for an angel. he initiates a didactic dialog, directing the controlled theatricality of the mies-en-scene to strictly religious channels.
in the london version the angel is the most inert, passive figure, sitting in a dreamy, reflective state, he acts as a compositional counterpart to the madonna, their profiles and hair styles mirroring each other.
these pieces instill a restrained, even formal attitude quite the opposite from the emotionally infused intimacy of 
an interesting similarity transpires between the resting madonna and st. anne in the other painting: the former may seem like the replica image of the latter. indeed, the virgin's mother exhibits the most sober and contemplative disposition (in an otherwise outspoken emotive scene) that matches the overall mood of the madonna of the rocks piece.
though the type of rocky landscape here is similar to the one depicted in the background of madonna and child with st. anne, it occupies more space, envelops the figures, and clearly plays a more central role. and then, the geographic origin of the scene itself suggests increasing landscape significance.
in two dimensions the group's organisation adheres to the classic triangular shape. arrangement in space produces a kind of crescent (john, madonna, angel, and jesus) whose semi-open geometry makes the viewer, facing the open side, the recipient of the projected meaning and overall impulse of energy. the crescent disperses and emits tension that builds up at the epicentre.
the virgin lifts her left hand slightly, resting it on an invisible cushion, softly gesturing as if pleading time to stop and everything that surrounds her to pay attention in what seems to be a blessing for the child christ. she appears to listen closely to her inner self, attuned to her soul, while performing the orchestrating move.
it's interesting to note the vertical succession of hands: first madonna's palm, then angel's pointing index finger (in the louvre piece), and third chirst's blessing motion. this cluster of gestures becomes a tripartite visual axis that counterbalances john's clasped hands, it's possible to visualize a triangle of which this axis marks the base and john's palms (or madonna's right hand) mark the apex.
the rocks accumulate heavily above and around the group, almost encroaching upon the saints, such landscape can be interpreted as menacing or as protective or perhaps both. blue toned mountains in the background not only absorb the light from the sky and the water, they create a color continuity between the group and their distant surroundings. in particular, the virgin's garment (especially in the london version) matches the color of the chain behind her, giving a literal tint to the painting's title.
the brown clusters at the foreground, painted in a similar tone, pile up in an uncanny and fanciful conglomerate, as if in an upside-down pattern. the insistent, repetitive rhyhtm of their tops brings to mind the gaping, large-toothed mouth of a predator. the way in which the artist chars the stones into smooth slabs that pile up close together to form a kind of staircase remind of 
eventually the landscape becomes an additional character, a pervasive, insistent actor that links the occasion to nature and the wordly in general.
the virgin of the rocks demonstrates a serious, deliberate mood, set off by equal measures of melancholy and religious ardour. there is no place for expression of love and regret, only contemplation about the mission ahead, and it importance. it eschews expressive close-ups and sudden movements, presenting a smoothly, calmly evolving course of events.
in these the pieces leonardo da vinci brings the art of painting to the threshold of high renaissance. the serenity of the virgin and the dainty expressions of the children anticipate 
 interesting reiteration may be traced in the bisected fruits: both display a cross section that reveals a telescopic, and somewhat kaleidoscopic pattern that appears to suck the viewer in where to exactly is unclear, but the black center of the pattern may allude to the eponymous cosmic phenomena, and their destructive forces. i doubt the artist has counted on the sinister effect, the dark end of the tunnel may conceptually (and not without some humor) imply the finishing line of consuming the product it was nice while it lasted, it's over, back to normal now. this reminds me of the known phrase, the hole of the bagel , which means nothing. the hole of the artichoke and the hole of the fig seem just as empty and devoid of edible substance... now that's just not fair.
 complex color modulations offset unassuming compositions. for instance, the whole artichoke boasts several varieties of green, usually achieved by adding white or black to the main tone. the cut version startles and rivets with contrasting color interplay, yellow enveloping the purple, two opposite colors on the wheel. the white of the stem and the innards acts as a neutral, and somehow abstract force of nature, it threatens to burst out into the beholder's face and to blind, as the expanding feature of white intensifies the air. indeed, the whole set-up resembles an atomic explosion (or a big bang, to align the metaphors) recalling the violent end of the vegetable on the one hand, and the enormous amount of energy that its growth expends on the other. the artist constructs a visual allegory of the agricultural process by color organization (and choice of composition).
 the nonchalant arrangement of the figs subtly arouses one's gustatory sense, the straightforward artichoke does the same thing they succeed because they hardly seem to try. naturalist fascination with patterns, geometrical and colorful, gradually transcends into an aesthetic admiration. powerful palette and simple symmetric compositions secure the latter. but perhaps the most accurate observation that could be made about these pieces is that they keep their promises.
perhaps the artist anticipates and ironizes overzealous fascination with technology. in my understanding of these pieces, the interplay of language and its parts with the cumbersome machines that contain it, or even enclose it, reinvigorates the dispute of humanities versus technology, and which will bring the progress we may have gotten accustomed to expect. in a way, the temporality of the devices underscores the vigor of technological progress. some machines die new ones appear. we do not see, however, the new generation depicted, it is but implied. it is the letters, either black on white or white on black, vivid and always relevant,-that remain active as the only working and still usable-components in these devices, words, unlike machines, will never fail those who use them regardless even of time itself.
m's today's blend is so homogeneous that sometimes it is difficult to discern any clear stylistic affiliation. the painter created a style that defies categorization both a unique adaptation and a category of its own. indeed, at some point it may seem that the artist may finally settle for any of the relevant trends realism, hyper-realism or even impressionism, at the stage when light effects enjoy a particular emphasis. for an outside observer that expectation alone is highly stimulating. ultimately, however, one learns that waiting for a definitive outcome is counterproductive but more amazing is the fact that that only serves to increase the suspense. is the artist playing some kind of a highly elaborate visual game? in my newly assumed role as a detective, i tend to say yes without a self-reproach of paranoia.
if pressed, i would have to say that the fine details, most reflections, depictions of glassy surfaces are usually hyper-real, light effects are often presented through a translucent impressionistic filter, the darker areas, fortified by earthly tones, exhibit strong realistic traits, finally, economical compositions may be found in either of the schools, as has been shown by several daily (and not only) painters. i admit that this analysis may only testify to my own confusion in the face of the entire (blogged) oeuvre. once again, the only way i can explain this eclecticism is to suggest that it was the artist's aim: to carefully study the possibilities of various trends, derive from each one a set of useful features and project them through an individual lens.
perhaps this outline may serve as a tentative guide to examine and interpret specific paintings. there is no definite distribution of features, each piece may include either qualities in various ratios, depending on the theme and composition but i find the endeavor itself titillating and gratifying. in m's own words, the blog was created to chronicle the artist's progress as a painter. we witness this progress, but are doomed to remain a step behind just where the artist wants us.
in order to tie this long horizontal composition together, poussin cements it with a matrix of arms and amphorae. arms, usually white or pinkish in tone, appear here and there, creating a chaotic scheme that evokes a sense of bustle, an almost auditory experience. eliezer's hand offers the gifts in an inconspicuous fashion, and blends with this general trend. the amphorae, however, appear in a more or less equal intervals, and impart a sense of rhythm that acts as a compositional glue of a different sort.
architectural motifs play a background role, though unlike in the judgment of solomon, they interact with objects in the foreground. for instance, eliezer's turban, the attribute of his masculinity, is repeated in the marble ball. while eliezer communicates his interest to rebecca the topic of their discussion being masculine-feminine relations the large marble ball overlooks the young ladies on the right, perhaps disclosing their line of thought.
similarly telling is solomon's face: divided by a shadow into two profiles, it reveals the twofold consequence of the verdict sad for one, happy for another. furthermore, it might hint at the king's inner doubts concerning this notorious judgment. the faces of the plaintiffs continue the visual theme of light and shadow, essentially transcending it into one of justice and injustice, respectively. the fact that the roles are reversed the shaded woman is the just, the illuminated is unjust serves to prove how precarious the whole notion of justice is. can anyone be sure what would have happened if it were not for the king's ingenuity?
as in other poussin's works, architecture plays the role of a metaphysical counterbalance. the two big black columns and the rectangular niches, when inspected closely, impart a sense of the vanity of the entire scene (alluding, in a way, to the kings famous vanity of vanities saying) and quietly neutralize the dramatic proceedings.
the painting acts as a moral and intellectual catalyst which, according to biographers and critics, was poussin's intent. the image's clarity encourages quick visual processing and further contemplation on the content, on the original narrative ideas. poussin makes himself a servant of the text, avoiding idealization or mannerism many renaissance artists utilized yet he authoritatively generates a veritable sense of drama. he is a virtuoso of a different sort: one of precise balance, of grace and clarity of compositional conception qualities that became the hallmarks of classicism.
respectively, spatial depth signifies a step towards emotional maturity and elaborates the devotional message, all the while demanding the same kind of growth from the observers. i think that this pastoral variant demonstrates more life, more blood and bone, if you will. the three actors literally have the chance to breathe and the children respond to their surroundings by engaging in some kind of a game, of religious symbolical meaning nevertheless.
john kneels before baby christ, simultaneously imitating a blessing with the cross, a foreshadow of what was to come (fundamental renaissance artistic device). the intimidating landscape adds a touch of immediacy that finds a way out in the vague smile of the madonna.
her nearly imperceptible frowning annuls that sign of content, and together they are synthesized into a thin but constant and unsettling sense of 
three levels of color cohere into a complex, but clear-cut, classic pyramidal composition: the bleak background, madonna's bright dress and the nearly white skin of the babies. it seems that there is no precedence, and each palette level deserves the same degree of attention what the background lacks in color it compensates for with scope. thus, besides the religious meaning, we are presented with the universal concept of birth, maturation, and death.
the ground would conceal the remains, hinting at the vacuum left by them with its bareness. to sum up, this image substitutes therapeutic qualities manifested in madonna 
if we go back to the formal and imposing element, i think it undermines the narrative by side-stepping, and consequently weakening it. this judgment makes more sense in comparison to later, more loose and original portrayals of evangelic narratives, performed, for instance, by caravaggio but this is an anachronism. in contemporary milieu of existing artistic norms, this rendering manifests perfection that we are accustomed to expect from the master. he did not innovate here, but he elevated the formula to the highest, possibly unprecedented level of execution, both in technical and psychological dramatic terms. the pairing of the angel guiding tobias reflects some of the sweetness in the interaction between madonna and baby christ, both children, embraced by the divine figures, extending hands, though the former with notable assistance.
the very clean composition accords harmoniously with the palette: the lower parts of the painting are rather vacant, and the colors are correspondingly desaturated, the higher we look, the more the color gains in intensity and tone. the richness of the curtain is almost opposite to the pallid stand before the throne. these features combined can be viewed as a painterly idiom for religious purification and awareness, starting below, slow and from scratch towards loftier realms of sacrifice, up to martyrdom (christ) and heaven (mary, later crowned the queen of heaven). thus the bare stand serves as an invitation for the devout viewer to commence on a spiritual journey, much like the youth holding the fish did. admirable is the lack of hysteria and the subtlety of the call for action, reflected in the tame and ruminative expression of the lion. raphael confidently endows surrounding subjects with that remarkable sense of calm and composure that characterize all of his madonnas.
the lyre occupying the lower seated infant serves as a direct reference to deities preceding christianity. but it would be incorrect to compare these babes with cupids or otherwise merry pagan seraphs from mythological renaissance paintings: they demonstrate seriousness and gravity uncharacteristic of their classical counterparts. the somewhat angular, nearly grotesque composition acts as a neutralizing component, and carries the christian message through, an exaggeration is needed to oppose, and prevail over the strong classicist motif.
there is another interesting observation to be made she, as a woman, represents the continuation of life, in this case, the life of the catholic faith. we witness her fertility in the form of two small children, playing busily beside her, the dilapidated, colorless structure behind her represents the sterility and inevitable degeneration. the painting becomes a playground for a theological dispute.
conceptually, this is an even more demanding piece. raphael imports extraneous cultural elements, sets them off against catholic religious characters and prompts the beholder to conduct the synthesis. though the artist guides the viewers with palette, giving only the madonna a fully colored outfit, the complexity of the overall design is undeniable.
additionally, a strange air of mystery transpires from the painterly surface, it could be the haunting blue of the sky, or the monotonous, light brown of the hills, encircling and perhaps threatening the main event. there is an air of notional abstraction, akin to that emanating from 
the mother's figure stands in conflict with her facial expression. her eyes speak eloquently of the deepest love and concern, of awareness of the significance of the moment, yet she cannot allow herself to even look into the direction of her sons, not to say anything of touching (as, for instance, does joseph, as he guides jacob's hand). this is an unnatural, and even cruel removal, and her body, stiff and with hands clasped in compliance contradicts the profound tenderness that her countenance and head inclination show. the lack of actual physical contact between the woman and her offspring is the more clear considering her proximity to the children. all this is not incidental: the process of blessing involves placing the palm on the receiver's head, and any touching would indicate some sort of involvement, which was strictly prohibited for females. the division of sexes and the resulting tension threaten to redirect sympathy towards the mother, at the expense of the family as a whole.
but the family as a single unit still dominates the scene. there are three generations, and the act of blessing ensures the spiritual continuation, which is no less important than the genetic one. the intimacy of the event is emphasized by the screen visible in the upper corners and is presumably transformed into secrecy. light originates from the left and above, behind jacob's back, and brings to mind a divine and spiritual illumination, since the source is not visible, one may assume that these faces shine from some kind of inner source. interesting is rembrandt's choice of apparel for his models: joseph wears a turban, a head gear usually assigned to exotic eastern characters from the biblical past, i can't determine whether the mother's sophisticated head gear is similarly ancient. the furs on jacob's side allude to his regal status as the forefather of the judeo-christian tradition.
the faces of the couple seem to glow by themselves: rembrandt uses light beyond its painterly purpose, as a tool that describes the inner state of the protagonists. light travels from above, first sculpting and penetrating their faces, and then bounces back, impregnated with the story of the young man and the woman.
the composition is fairly classical in its triangular pyramid shape. the hands of the actors constitute the most physically animated part of the scene and evince complex symmetry, these body parts play an ornamental compositional role, decorating the otherwise simplified, static event. the garments, though rich and festive, cannot vie with the subtlety and subdued richness of the facial expressions and, in fact, seem to sit uncomfortably on the wearers.
a realistic, painterly display of light and shadow, a less rigid (even if static) composition, and a general shift towards intimacy and individualization all these stand principally against the grand spiritual generalizations of the renaissance, which are all but abandoned in this piece. in choosing to depict a jewish rather than christian bride judaism being much more pragmatic and down-to-earth in matters of matrimony rembrandt found the perfect theme to express his own vision of baroque painterly principles.
painting birds can be difficult due to the mercurial nature of the beast: constantly on the move, feeding, flying, or courting, even the larger specimens, when deliberately static, appear tense and ready to take wing.
the artist's attention to the motivation of his subjects, combined with an understanding of their anatomy and unique locomotion, allows him to negotiate these complications, and render a convincing image that's at once painterly and iconic.
a display of aggression (above), where the bird is shown exerting its entire mass to issue a message of warning, epitomizes rick nilson's style. the creature's fearlessness, channeled via pictorial veracity, draws the attention and fascinates, as any good nature portrait should.
by picturing the avian models from such close proximity (as if suggesting a face-off between the audience and the subjects), the artist both cancels and emphasizes the differences between the human spectators and the birds. we are close to them, yet are so different. the incompatibility can be a rich ground for comic effect, the compatibility a reflection on the unity of nature and the humans' part in it.
another common theme in the artist's repertory is the crab. a pronouncedly symmetrical animal, the crab can be compositionally challenging to paint, to avoid repetition and rigidity the painter positions the crabs askew, and adjusts the viewing angles to convey a sense of mass and presence.
diagonals are not the only device employed to signal movement. thick, rich, smeared strokes of vibrant color impart a sense of motion and progression through water and sand. the inconstant, varied texture of the brushwork, combined with the seemingly random scattering of color, becomes a powerful method of light representation. where this quality peaks, the style of the paintings approximates impressionism.
the abundance of light obvious to a painter living so close to a large body of water, a natural mirror and refractor of the sun's rays shows the environment at its busiest, liveliest moments. using a brilliant white tone, rick nilson sprays light over everything, flooding the paintings with spontaneous, seemingly infinite energy. the animals materialize within that flux, restating life at its most immediate and invigorating.
 while playing with the subjects the artist alludes to their unstable status as pets. furthermore, the games these dogs participate in as main players include shows and races, activities that may involve victimization and gambling. i think that these subtle reminders of the dark side of pet industry may invoke remote but nagging feelings of a possibility of abuse. here the dark palette resonates directly if only of an indirect and suggested sentiment. in a way these tensions unwind as a possible outcome of the suspense mentioned in the first sentence of this review. sometimes it may appear that the long springy bodies are prepared to sprint into opposite directions towards the owner, or away from him.
 but these are esoteric developments. the general mood is of a pleasant and light communication between the out-of-the-frame owner and the pet, between the painter and the audience. we are meant to derive aesthetic pleasure from the accurate depictions of these dogs' elongated graceful bodies. it may seem like overindulgence, but it isn't. these animals must be beautiful in order to succeed at what they were born to do: pursue and catch moving prey. observers who become caught up in the spectacle are collateral...
the notion of weight extends to the backgrounds too. the ethereal flowers accord with abstract airy atmosphere, but the fruits need to actually lie on something. the artist chooses a basic setting resembling a wall and floor (or table) conjunction, with linear and angular characteristics which complement the globular forms of the objects without overpowering the latter. the dark gray bluish tones consume all the light, leaving a few dashes for the still life but eloquent, central dashes. overall, the fruits and vegetables appear to lay in a nook, or a lair, a stylized environment evidently composed by the artist. the focus in these paintings is on the relationship between the various subjects rather than between them and the background.
general color schemes are bolder: exotic red-black and yellow-green combinations enliven the quiet compositions. although the florals display powerful tonal clashes (such as the opposing reds and greens), the human eye tends to ignore the green of the stems and leaves and focuses on the bright blooms. perhaps we are not unlike insects, tempted by the flowers' brightness, only we bring death by plucking them whereas the insects bring life by pollinating them. here the colors declare the strong sweet or sour taste of fruits that were meant to be plucked. in some ways, sinh's still life reclaims some of the zest lost in melancholic flowers.
envisaged as a part of a series, the painting stands out for its overpowering, almost brutal display of concrete or brick-made mass. in a curious overturn, the artist's direct attack method has backfired: the building, it seems, is ready to attack back. possible symbolism aside,- nowhere before in stephen magsig's work have the crumbling structures of detroit appeared so dangerously close to the viewer, so dangerously close to collapse. the sensation of an overwhelming, intimidating cliff, aided by the low vantage point, becomes even more intensified by the strong red colors.
the red monochromatic swathes convey the scene's strong industrial flavor: manufacturing work is often monotonous, dull, repetitive. dirty, chaotic brushwork on the walls adds an element of raggedness and almost palpable realism, lending more depth to the overall sensation of a production mill. extreme economy of composition there is nothing to divert the eye from the building except a few grass sprouts -directly confronts the viewers with these effects. it is a harsh, uncompromising vision.
russian oven-bed
on a different note, i would like to digress and direct your attention to interesting similarities between the detroit structure and a traditional russian oven-bed. the oven-bed was once indispensable to the russian peasant way of life, tumbling its way into many popular folk tales. in these tales, the oven can talk, move around and save ivan the fool from various troubles...
russian people loved it and glorified it for its universal qualities: it served as a resting place, it provided the people with bread and it warmed the hut the ultimate source of life and leisure. in the image above the oven appears painted in neutral, soothing white, an antipode to the intensity of downtown red. 
let down by the symbolism, the composition nevertheless exhibits considerable power, power derived from the sheer physical presence of the structures. both the bridge and the warehouse parade massive weight and bulk and, as they overlap, emphasize the illusion of depth. their rigid linear frames are softened by the curving rails in the low right corner of the piece.
colors faithfully convey the bleak and foggy atmosphere of an industrial area. grayish green, blue, and especially brown tones (on the ground, the bridge, the rusty rails) soak up the light and dull it, dust can almost be felt in the static air between all the structures and buildings. it's never easy to breathe in an industrial area, and from given point of view the struggle becomes almost literally apparent.
true to his style, the artist tackles the scene head-on, placing the warehouse almost exactly at the center of the composition. the green edifice, like a sleeping giant, appears to stand in wait perhaps for better times. as 
strategically dispersed points of light, shimmering and glowing, assure that this almost completely monochromatic vision has, in fact, a life on the inside. the artist places the bulk of the plant slightly to the right of the center: the composition unfolds from left to right, literally peaking at the highest point of the structure, the crimson dot of the tallest chimney. both the slight angle of the subject and the water expanse before it mitigate the frontal attack method the artist usually employs in his industrial detroit pieces.
the river at the foreground adds the image a touch of tranquility, but also of suspense. as the surface reflects and smudges the lights, the water becomes a sort of a buffer zone between the viewer and the factory, a calm transitional phase that at once communicates and warns about the other side. the reflections almost inevitably bring to mind 
nocturne is a relatively narrow musical genre with the clear objective to reflect or engender in listeners the sense of night: it's usually mellow, soothing, and evocative. despite its generic limitations, a nocturne can be a gripping, and quite charming piece of music. stephen magsig's use of the term asserts the programmatic nature of this work (several other nocturnes exist) and, eventually, confirms its very own, remotely humming, night-time charm.
the painting describes a key moment in the myth of danae. locked up by the king, who fears for his life after being foretold that his daughter's son would kill him, she becomes zeus' love interest. the father of gods eventually penetrates the princess' chamber in the form of a golden shower, thereby begetting a multitude of allegorical interpretations, as well as a son, perseus.
the paintings are famous for their frankness, and are often compared, thematically and compositionally, with the artist's the venus of urbino. but danae lacks the direct intimacy of the venus of urbino, and has a more clear narrative purpose to it. it is thus less intimately erotic than it is lustful and sexual.
looking intently at the incoming coins, danae gently tilts her neck and torso towards them, slightly parting her legs, she appears a welcoming and grateful recipient of the descending rain of affection. what goes in her mind, her most unconstrained and sexually charged self could be reflected in her company, who spreads her apron unabashedly widely to catch as much of the precious nuggets as she can.
allegory lies at the heart (or perhaps at the brain) of the venetian master's series: the deity appears in a purely metonymical form (with some exceptions his profile is visible peaking from the clouds in some of the versions), producing an absence that can and should be filled with various figurative meanings. the most obvious, of course, suggests that zeus didn't actually transform himself into gold, but simply paid his way inside.
danae receives the rain for what it represents, the nursemaid for what it is. literally, the princess appears greedy, figuratively, she is enamoured. the old woman, a visual foil, displays outright greed but, we can read her behaviour as a commentary on her counterpart, as she enacts danae's display of desire, presenting it in the concrete form of avarice. perhaps all passionate desires spring from the same root.
the allegory can have additional meanings. for instance, the association of gold with masculinity and power that grants access to a woman's bedchamber. another interpretation suggests the theme of intercourse in exchange for money simply put, prostitution.
a diagonal extending from top left corner to lower right bisects the paintings, establishing the juxtaposition between the mistress and her maid and consequently between the figurative and the literal. danae's light-skinned abundant figure, sprawling on white sheets, occupies the lower resultant triangle (where all the light accumulates), the dark-skinned, uncomely maid stands in the second, upper triangle.
furthermore, many of the lines create parallels, generating a visual rhythm, and producing tentative polygons that map out, with the assistance of color, a more global division and visual logic.
these energetic diagonals impose a purposeful sense of movement and dynamism. motion becomes especially important in the immediate local context of zeus' infiltration (the streams of coins are also arranged in fast, descending lines) from what seems like a different dimension. the sheer energy and force of the movement lends the composition a kind of proto-baroque flavor.
color plays an important compositional role, helping in dividing the piece into logical areas, and marking the most dramatic reference points. contrast, between dark and light hues, as well as between warm and cool tones, pumps visual juices into the overall framework, rendering it more dynamic, vivid and fleshed-out.
interestingly, the palette device of a golden eruption in the sky can be viewed in the artist's 
titian revels in exploring danae's passion, lingering on her body and gesticulation to the point of voyerism, at the same time he ridicules and exposes the maid. he admires the youth and spontaneity of his primary subject, coupling it with what appears like disgust for the secondary one.
in this judgmental, somewhat cruel approach he takes the viewpoint of youth without reservations a bias that could be the very glue that holds this composition's conception together. one must be hated so that another is loved.
to compare, danae with eros presents a much sweeter mood, but lacks the psychological depth and invention of the nursemaid series.
while the catholic dogma prescribes the sins of lust and greed as deadly, the artist eschews moralistic lessons and avoids denunciation. instead, he adopts a universal and liberal approach of genuine fascination with human weakness and character, he finds gratification in probing the depth of human emotion regardless of its tonality.
while the complex, multi-tiered composition may appear overwhelming in its sheer amount of detail and visual information, it adheres to renaissance concepts of painterly design. hierarchical order, compositional clarity, and overall harmony ensure that the grandeur and expressive sweep of the protagonists do not overwhelm, but inform the viewer.
the painting is often considered titian's early masterpiece, as this 
titian condenses the earth and the heavens essentially the first and the second stage in mary's ascension hence giving his work a temporal dimension as well. he then establishes an hierarchy in the number and size of the acting figures: the apostles on the first tier, mary and multiple cherubims on the second, god, two pages, and the chorus on the third.
the higher the floor the fewer central figures there are, and the less space they occupy their religious significance, however, increases. such inverse progression can also be seen (in a downward direction) in 
the apostles appear in a state of immense agitation, sending adoring and anxious glances towards the mother of christ. their placement at the lower level of the panel, closest to the altar, allows the basilica visitors to identify with them first, the congregation, in all its multitude, thus comprises another notional level, one that looks up at (and to) the apostles. naturally, the people need to aim even higher to see the madonna and god himself.
mary's form and expression reveal a state of complete spiritual receptivenss and readiness. the sharp contrast of light and shadow across her face enhances the mysticism, further emboldened by the pouring gold that reflects in her eyes. caught in a moment of epiphany, she herself becomes one, so powerful and awesome her reaction is to the vision of the lord.
titian's precision in portraying emotional states extends further, to the figure of levitating god, who emerges as the calmest of all present. perhaps not surprisingly, he exudes limitless confidence and fatherly affection: he is about to host a very important guest. the slightly diagonal line of his red cloak produces a parallel with mary's shoulder line, implying their affinity.
besides fleshing out the shapes of the actors and the clouds, color plays the mystical role of announcing the divine presence. titian chooses brilliant golden hues, which turn incandescent dazzling white just below the lord's apparition (which resembles the sun as a result), to accompany and communicate his arrival. gold also marks a kind of crown, or halo, around the figure's graying head.
the bluish sky, with a hint of sunrise (essentially the same golden tones that infuse the heavens, oozing down from above), stretches above the apostles and beneath the clouds: it plays the more neutral compositional role of dividing the earthly and divines realms. the clouds, lit from above and shaded below, assume a palpable quality, resembling cotton wool.
red and green colored clothing ensures continuity and visual rhythm and interrelation between the three planes. from below, two saints dressed red act as a funnel, directing the eye towards mary's dress, who in turn leads to god's own red tinted garment. the complementary green does just that, offsetting the red farther at the flanks, as well as balancing both the virgin's and lord's attire.
colors thicken at either end of the painting, as the dark green earthy platform on which the apostles stand (and where titian planted what seems like a sarcophagus with his name on it) turns black in some areas, while the chorus of flanking angels above absorbs the golden sheen, and becomes thick orange, and even brown. thus color also assists in the logical task of delineating the scene.
titian's consistent, deliberate palette application coupled with a supernova-like eruption of light shows that he could employ color as an agent of order and of chaos at the same time. the mastery of two such contradictory types of coloration the capacity to run the full gamut of the medium's scope both derives from and attests to the artist's venetian origin.
furthermore, the intensity of some of the gestures betrays signs of departure from such renaissance precepts as idealization and harmony. it holds the seeds of swirling action and effusive sentiment that defined the work of mannerist, and later baroque artists, for instance, the upward motion and the low point of view anticipates the outpouring drama of 
the venus of urbino derives its inspiration from 
the painting presents a full-fledged composition that balances somewhat the languorous static character of the reclining protagonist with a consistent dynamic component.
the tiles, foreshortned by the perspective, rhytmically lead to the end of the hall, where one of the maids is hurrying to prepare her mistress' dress, the red dress of the other echoes the cushion's red corner in the foreground. thick verticals relieve the eye from the nearly all-black piece of wall behind's the figure's back.
this wall helps to define the boundary between the private and the public (or semi-private): the sleeping chamber at the foreground is for your eyes only, the hall appears to offer more access to the help, and possibly visitors. the portico entrance and the trees confirm the more open character of the main room.
it is the enclosed room that allows venus to open her eyes and accompany her nudity with such a soul-baring gaze, giorgione's goddess, placed outside, sleeps with her eyes closed. titian's model is thus so much bolder, and so much more revelatory. her unconditional honesty translates into a kind of incorrupt innocence, no matter how erotic and suggestive the context is.
these intimations lead to the notion that titian gives physical attraction and pleasure an approbation, or at least a well considered aknowledgement. the image overall can be viewed as one giving legitimacy to the idea of sexuality, and endorsing intercourse (between a husband and a wife) as positive and desirable. catholic dogma of marital intimacy and procreative sex as inferior to celibacy, and as of being merely the lesser of two evils between itself and extramarital relations, dissolves in this image.
at the same time, the author insists on the marital interpretation, basing his claims on iconography: the two cassoni, probably containing the girl's bridal garments, and the curled little dog, a very common symbol of marital fidelity (
private, discreet ownership could be the most fitting bridge to the gap (one not altogether uncommon in contemporary western society) between sexy and marital. intended to be owned and seen in a private collection, the image becomes a personal message similar to that sleeping chamber for your eyes only. 
and today still, while the curves of venus' naked body are there for the eyes of all to observe and admire, 
stylistic divergence parallels the emotional one. the piece you see below is evidently realistic, it exploits the little light there is to create a rather anemic pattern (apparently the cow's shadow) on the ground, while the darker details (particularly in the background) receive strained attention shadow is king, light is only the page. the artist makes a virtue out of necessity and veers towards realism where impressionism would suffocate due to lack of natural illumination. the other two works, however, can be categorized as impressionistic with nearly the same certainty. light dethrones shade, which recedes into the hangar's belly or disappears altogether, and adds characteristic distortions: amplifies close subjects and misshapes them slightly into somewhat generalized types.
it's interesting how the rural environment, though including a fence, seems compact yet welcoming, as opposed to the vast industrial spaces, which nevertheless cast a claustrophobic sense of no escape. the animal stands undisturbed where grass grows under its hooves, but is constantly on the move as if on a production line in enclosed settings. indeed, the freedom of choice of feed, one of the few liberties domesticated animals may have, appears to have been denied of the animals in industrial farms. perhaps the random patterns on the cows' skins may be seen as a protest, a chaotic antidote to the mechanical horizontal and vertical lines of the fences and the supporting pillars.
i think that in these paintings the artist probes into the basic instinct of freedom, common to all animals, including humans. the wide areas with overhanging metal and wood restrict the inhabitants from all directions, and our instinctive reaction of shrinking back when looking (or visiting) can be explained simply: we would not want to live there. we don't ask the cows... but maybe they can provide some food for thought too?
indeed, photorealism emerges as the most suitable style for symbolic subjects where the symbolized needs less stylization and more representation. just imagine any of these paintings in an impressionistic reincarnation absurd, and a painterly misnomer. i think that the popularity of photo and hyper-realism discloses the wish to contemplate reality at its most pronounced while retaining an honest aesthetic and artistic framework. additionally, this trend offers an adequate response to television and photography, it acknowledges their influence, yet assimilates rather than imitates. on the one hand, it proves that it can do just as good, and on the other keeps on renovating painting by continuous exchange of ideas with other art forms.
to return to more technical aspects of todd's art, i would like to mention the scrupulous and incredibly (credibly, that is) accurate treatment and distribution of color. the brown flirts with black, red, gray and white, and its own range is exceptionally wide, the additional colors either deepening or diluting the original hue. the ensuing variety, backed by the irregular configuration, provides an unlimited source of entertainment. the green bottle piece displays similar qualities, with cooler tones. putting all symbolism aside, these paintings are first and foremost technical masterpieces and should be known as such above all.
the difference, of course, is in the number of dimensions. painting only replicates restoration, just as art imitates life, but in this particular case, the common cause of paying a tribute to the theme brings the two spheres closer together. i think that a series of paintings does even further in that direction: almost every piece focuses on a single detail or part, as if recording an actual restoration in progress. surely that would be a very laborious recording (compared to photography, for instance) but, surprisingly, it would make sense everything about these cars is excessive and such an artistic finale brings about a logical conclusion to the mechanical melodrama.
in conclusion i would like to discuss how composition here differs from the artist's food and other still life works. if in those paintings he sought to include and unify, here the objective is almost proportionally opposite. the close-ups exclude the rest of the body and, they literally exclude the uninitiated (consolidating the camaraderie of the experts). he lingers on the separate parts in a display of what i find no other term for but analytical painting, so elaborate and accurate is the rendering. indeed, the next step for the viewer would be to induce the entire car from the depicted detail. and is there a more direct way to engage our imagination 
when compared to kitchenware, the still life with food items displays a notable compositional development. the theme calls for a parcelling to smaller and more numerous objects, and a complication of composition inevitably ensues. retaining unity becomes a more demanding, if not a burning challenge, i think that the artist recognizes and stands up to it gracefully and, which might be even more important, discreetly. he doesn't aim at radical stylistic overhaul but builds up a generic change by fine tuning, gradually creating an alternative set of painterly principles (involving angle, tint variation and other parameters), perfected for these kinds of subjects.
it would be interesting to follow a shift in an opposite direction in the artist's car paintings, where he concentrates on a single detail of the bigger image. here i would like to restate that reaching these conclusions would be impossible without browsing vic's extensive library of reproductions on his websites. i am very enthusiastic about the benefits of publishing artwork on the internet and would like to encourage artists to start art blogs. it is never too late. and it is not incidental that vic's blogs were named a studio and a gallery because it is precisely what they are, allowing an in-depth inquiry into various aspects of his artistic process.
vic's paintings may also function as illustrations: smooth and cheerful palette bordered by dark contouring positions his artwork comfortably between the two trends. they remind me of old school hand drawn and painted animation, from the fifties, only with more luster and zest. and there is something naive and traditional about them, in the best meaning of these words a warm reminder of domestic familial comfort. straightforward and clean compositions entertain the eye without diverting it to unnecessary elaborations, and manifest disarming honesty. this still life is both a celebration of unpretentiousness and an ingenuous indulgence in the abundance of light and color good life, some would say.
however, i would like to return to the reflections, as some of them present an endless source of marvel. near hallucinatory distortions of line and color will hypnotize the susceptible viewer... well, maybe. contrary to the common belief that staring at the kettle won't make it boil quicker, getting lost in these colorful swirls can prove to be an effective time machine, transferring us right to the boiling point. (the click or the whistle terminates the stupor... not to worry). eventually, in pieces where all of the mentioned qualities intermix particularly harmoniously, reaching a critical mass, the master definition of a classic emerges as eminently suitable, many other works being very close to that description.
here the faces represent hard labor and farmers. they appear tired and worried, perhaps tired 
the single source of light an effective compositional tool that unifies the lit scene into a tentative pyramidal shape marks food as the central concern for those who gathered around the table. the lamp may also bear a symbolic meaning, as this meal could be the only bright moment in these people's lives.
formally, this piece gravitates much more to earthy realism of 
van 
there is an interesting invention (perhaps an expressionistic streak): the green of the overcoat travels on to the eyes. here the green color combines symbolic and literal meanings: generally signifying poison, it refers particularly to van 
the psychosomatic effects of absinthe became infamous since then, and today are sought for by artists who seek a boost- of inspiration. rightly or wrongly, van 
in many ways, this piece is all about contrasts. 
it makes sense that these houses appear so small for the artist, they indeed were small. what was big for him the universal questions about life, death and god, and how they all relate to each other was depicted in appropriate cosmic proportions, the stars and how they came to be often allude to these questions. the artist expressed his world view on this canvas, making it a brooding, philosophical work of art.
yet another contrast is that of nature and the city, of the untamed and the civilized. it is well demonstrated by the opposition of the tree in the foreground to the church on the outskirts of the town. this contrast may also be seen as the manifestation of the artist's personal conflict with the religious institution, ensuing from his personal experience. after all, he failed as a clergyman, largely due to his rebellious and uncompromising character.
van 
the painting above combines attractive and unattractive qualities, celebrating nature in its most vibrant and unadorned. uncompromising rendering presents fading, worn blossoms, some of which lost their plumage altogether, corpses of what used to be flowers. the result is not pretty, at least not in the conventional sense.
the top few blooms brim with life, and betray a subtext of surprise of astonishment at the unusual situation of being torn away from the ground and placed into a foreign object.
van gogh is very meticulous in handling the details, conveying deformity, and providing almost every possible unflattering angle. most of the blossoms appear to be in various stages of decay, some have only begun to droop, others are completely broken. one head already lost its color, others are on the way, having lost all of their petals. differences in value expound- these metamorphoses: the darker the yellow, the closer the sunflower is to total withering.
even the livelier, fresher flowers seem somehow exposed, showing their green hinder parts in a nearly indecent turn, together, the subjects appear to be in distress, acting almost as a pack of pursued animals would. the painting works on the emotional, as well the aesthetic level it's a beautiful still life that's also a collection of dying flowers.
